
BARD'S TALE SOLVE

	First, build a party consisting of a monk, two paladins, a magician, a bard, and a conjurer. Leave the Adventurer's Guild and explore the city. Visit Garth's Armory and note the location. Find the Review Board. (Next to the inn on Trumpet Street) Whenever you loose hit points, they can be restored at a temple. By paying for it, you can even heal a dead person. After a fight, search the area and take everything. Experiment with the item and see what it does. If it is not of use, you can usually sell it at Garth's. Visit Roscoe's Energy Emporium to get an idea of what it costs to restore hit points. (Located off the Gran Plaz on the corner of Grey Knife) If you do not have gold, you can restore hit points by going to the Adventurer's Guild and waiting. If you wait anywhere else, you will be attacked. After you wander around the city awhile and are able to survive, you can start into the dungeons. Be sure to map as you go and return to the review board frequently to advance levels. 

	The easiest dungeon is reached from the inn on Rakhir Street. Enter the inn, order a drink, and select wine. You will be ushered into the wine cellar. Use the MALE spell to indicate traps. Take the stairs down from the wine cellar to the sewers. Locate the stairs that go down to the second level and go down. Explore this level to find out two hints that you will need later plus the name of the Mad God. Find the stairs and go to the lowest level of the sewers. You will find one item of importance on this level for later in the game. After you find it, locate the stairs and exit the sewers. 

	The next dungeon that you need to go to is the catacombs. Go to one of the Mad God's temples and move to it's east side. Ask to speak to the priest and give them the Mad God's name (TARJAN). The first level contains nothing of interest and is simply a survival test. The second level has a clue in it about the Mad God that you need to find. (Do not go to the southwest corner of this level) The bottom level contains something that you will need later. Once you reach the third level, you will have to use a teleport square to get out. It is in the southeast corner of the dungeon and will take you to the Wizards Realm. You must defeat him and gain possession of the Eye. Once you have this, you are ready for the next dungeon. 

	Harkyn's castle is the next one and it is located in the northeast corner of Skara Brae. Before entering, have your magic user summon the most powerful character possible to fill the special slot. On the first level of this castle is an item of importance. The crystal sword is located in the southeast corner of this level. After you get the sword, head for the second level. On this level, you will be asked a riddle. The answer is (SHIELDS). This will give you a magic mouth which can be used to cast a SOSI spell. Then, go to the southwest corner of the floor by teleporting from a square towards the middle of the northern section. The portal to the third level is located in the northeast section of this level. The third level contains the entrance to the Tower. An old man will ask you a question on this level, answer (SKULL TAVERN). You will also encounter berserkers on this level at 12E 5N. (Try using the MIBL spell or frost horn) The berserkers are worth 60,000 experience points so it is advantageous to fight them several times. You can teleport from the castle entrance, fight the berserkers, teleport back to the entrance, exit the castle, then keep doing it until you run low on spells. After you have built you characters up some doing this, you can attempt the Tower. You will find a statue of the Mad God located in the southeast corner of this level. When you fight the statue, you will be transported inside the Tower. 
	
	After you are teleported, go one step forward, turn right, then kick the door down. Backup your character disk before entering. Be careful in this maze as much of it is dark. Once you go inside, watch for teleports for they are frequent. After you have reached the anti-magic square from wandering in a small dark area, the next step forward will teleport you to 11E 12N. Explore until you find the magic mouth which will ask you a riddle. Answer (STONE GOLEM). You will be teleported again, this time to a large dark area. Go to 12E 2N and answer the riddle to escape. Answer (SINISTER). You can then map your way through a lighted area to another dark section. Once you enter this dark area, go to the very north end and find the Silver Triangle. You can then exit the dark area by going south from 1E 6N. When you have the crystal sword you should not have trouble with the Stone Golem blocking your path after you defeat him. From here, you can exit the tower or continue on. Go down the snakey road on the eastside of the maze. Take the door that goes west. Go southwest once inside the room avoiding the spinners and teleports. When you make it, you will be teleported to 14E 1N. From there, it is easy to find Kylearan himself. He will give you a key that will help you get into the tower. He will then teleport to the stairs that exit his tower. 

	Go two the wine cellar. Teleport your party to 17E 16N 3D. Take the stairs up, turn right, kick the door in. Level one is easy to find your way around in. Walk around until you reach the magic mouth on the eastside. After you leave the magic mouth you will be on level 2. Once on level 2, go to 4E 15N and answer the question (Circle). You will obtain the silver circle. Then, go to the stairs in the middle of the southern part on this level. Level 3 is very difficult. First of all, get the key at 19E 12N. This key allows you to come in using the front gate. Travel around this level, eventually ending up at the magic mouth at 10E 4N. Say these 7 words one at a time (LIE WITH PASSION AND BE FOREVER DAMNED). Stairs will appear at 3E 9N. This will take you to the 4 level of the tower. There is only a limited number of ways to go on this level. When you get to the northeast corner, don't let the doors confuse you. Eventually, go the southwest corner an d find the portal. Level 5 is the last level. The maze will lead you to a lava pit on the eastern side of the level. There, you dive in and are teleported to 10E 6N. You must then march up the hall of harm carrying  the three silver objects. A door will appear to the north. Pass through the door and cast a rest spell. Go north to the final battle. It is fairly easy to defeat Mangar and his vampires. Proceed on more square north and answer the last question (SPECTRE SNARE).
