DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR
Strategic Studies Group (SSG)
GAME MANUAL

1. THE DECISIVE BATTLES GAME SYSTEM
Decisive Battles of the American Civil War (Vol I) recreates
six  important  battles  from the first  years  of  the  War
between the States. The American Civil War lasted four years
and its one million casualties reflect the determination and
ferocity with which it was fought. Hopelessly outnumbered in
terms  of  manpower and materiel, the thirteen  confederated
southern states kept their secession hopes alive by dint  of
commitment, superior leadership and a fair amount of luck.
The American armies which took the field in 1861 were little
more  than  untrained  militia, led for  the  most  part  by
inexperienced  officers  and clumsily  trying  to  copy  the
military systems of the major European powers.
Four  years  later these same armies were a  match  for  any
European  contemporary.  They had  evolved  new  tactics  to
accommodate the vastly increased effect of musketry  on  the
battlefield. The use of trench warfare so characteristic  of
the  Great War some 50 years later was pioneered by American
armies.  Railways were used to expedite the flow of supplies
and  reinforcements to contested areas so that for the first
time  in  the history of warfare, armies could stay  in  the
field almost all year round.
In  the end, of course, the Union triumphed. Robert E. Lee's
surrender  at Appomattox Courthouse in April of 1865  marked
the  effective end of the Confederacy. The Decisive  Battles
Game  System has been specifically designed to recreate  the
battles  of this era. Volumes II and III cover battles  from
the middle and latter years respectively.
To  get  started with the game, we recommend that you follow
this sequence.
(i). Read the specific information for your computer type in
the  scenario booklet for details on installation and start-
up.
(ii).  Play  through the introductory tutorial described  in
the scenario booklet.
(iii).  Select any scenario and start playing, referring  to
this manual as necessary. You should read the Player's Notes
for  a  particular scenario before playing it for the  first
time as they contain useful background information.
This  manual contains two major sections. Part One, The Game
Routines  explains  the operation of  the  game  system  and
contains all that you need to know to play a game. Part Two,
WarPlan÷  explains the use of the scenario design  routines,
including  WarPaint÷, SSG's icon and terrain  editor.  While
you  do  not need to read this section to play the game,  it
will  provide some insights into the deeper workings of  the
game  system.  In addition, we would encourage  everyone  to
find out just how easy it is to modify existing scenarios or
create original work.

2. THE TYPES OF GAME MENUS
The  order  menus which drive the game can be  divided  into
four types.
(a)  Branch Menus - These menus signpost the route to  other
menus  [2,4,7,9]. Note that most of them also  provide  some
information.
(b)   Information  Menus  -  These  menus  provide  specific
information on the various forces and functions in the  game
[3].
(c)  Action Menus - These menus are the centre of  the  game
system. All of the orders used in the game are given through
them [5,6,8,10,11,12].
(d) Single Function Menus - [1].

3. THE GAME MENUS DESCRIBED
Menu H (Game Master)
This screen always appears at the beginning of each turn. It
is  common to both players. It is the first screen you  will
see  after  completing  the scenario selection  details  and
choosing <START>.
In  the  four lines of text above the menu window,  you  are
told the date, the time of day, the current turn number  and
the total number of turns in the game.
Below  the  menu window you are told whether it is daylight,
dawn, dusk or night and the weather condition.

Menu 1 (Save Game Utility)
This  is a single function menu which allows you to load  or
save  a  game,  change the DOS path to the current  disk  or
directory or load an 'auto saved game' if present.
To  save a game, locate the <SAVE GAME> line with the  arrow
keys  and type (RET). A large catalog window displays a list
of  current  save game files. Use an arrow key to  move  the
cursor  bar  to the location in which you wish to  save  the
game.  If that location contains an existing file, then  the
current  game will be saved over that file. Empty slots  are
marked 'free'. When you have chosen a location, type (RET).
The  menu  window now displays the <COMMENT> and  <SAVE  IT>
lines.  Choosing <COMMENT> allows you to edit both the  name
of  the  game and a three line synopsis. When you are ready,
locate the <SAVE IT> line and type (RET).
To  load  a game, choose <LOAD>. Use the arrow keys to  move
the  cursor bar to the desired game location and type (RET).
The chosen game will be loaded.
The <PATH> command allows you to change the current disk  or
directory  for loading and/or saving games. The  default  is
the  directory from which the game was run. When typing disk
identifiers, please type a colon (:) after the drive  letter
(e. g. B:). The path is limited to 26 characters.
Save game disks must be formatted by DOS before use.
The  <LOAD AUTO> command will load an auto saved game if one
is present.

Menu 2 (Operations Master)
This  is a branch menu. The information appearing above  the
menu window identifies the commander of the Army, his second
in  command  if present and the name of the Army.  The  icon
representing  the  Army  HQ  appears  to  the  left  of  the
commander's  name.  The information below  the  menu  window
tells  you how many victory points your side has accumulated
to date, a leader and troop casualty summary and whether you
have more victory points than your opponent at this point in
the  game.  IBM  users  are given  an  indication  of  their
performance  to date in the lower right of the  screen.  The
game  is  considered contested if there is less than  a  20%
difference between each side's VP total. Otherwise you  will
be told you are winning or losing.
The  menu  window  is divided into two sections.  These  are
Operations and Reports.
The  <ROSTER> function allows IBM users access to a detailed
breakdown  of their forces. Every HQ and brigade is  listed,
along  with  their  strengths,  artillery  complements   and
current  condition. Destroyed and reinforcing  brigades  are
included.  Use the arrow, home, end, or Pg Up/Down  keys  to
locate  individual units or to page through the report.  Hit
(RET)  to select the unit high-lighted by the menu bar.  The
game  map  appears  with the cursor identifying  the  chosen
unit. Note that brigades have a 9-character I.D. in the  IBM
version.
We  recommend  that you examine the <MAP WALK>  menu  before
issuing  instructions, especially while you're learning  the
game.
Note  that  this  same <MAP WALK> function is  available  in
several menus to make information easier to access.
If  you select <OPTIONS>, IBM users will be given access  to
five  optional  features. Menu 12  will  give  you  all  the
details.  Apple  II/C-64  users  have  the  <OPTIONS>   line
replaced with <RESIGN>. The <RESIGN> option is for use when,
for whatever reason, you wish to end the game. The game will
stop and the end of game screen will be printed. You will be
prompted to avoid accidental resignations.

Menu 3 (Map Walk)
This  is  an information menu. On selecting <MAP WALK>  from
Menu 2, 8, 10 or 11, the cursor is thrown into the map.  Use
the  I,J,K,M keys, the arrow keys or the 1-6 keys  to  march
the  cursor across the map which will scroll once the cursor
reaches  the  edge.  Type (0) to centre the  screen  on  the
cursor.
At  any time you may type (RET) to bring up the menu window.
You  may examine the ownership of hexes, examine the terrain
by  temporarily clearing units from the map or  examine  the
terrain masked by the road network.
You  may move the cursor from objective to objective  either
by naming the objective you wish to go to or using the arrow
keys to cycle through them.
You may also move the cursor from unit to unit by naming the
unit  you wish to go to. The term unit describes any  combat
formation, either brigade or HQ.
Use  the  arrow keys to select the piece of information  you
wish to examine and then type (RET). To terminate a display,
type (RET) to replace the cursor in the menu window, use the
arrow  keys to select the display you wish to turn  off  and
type (RET) again to complete the process.
More  than one display may be examined at the same time.  Be
warned, however, that in some cases the information from one
display will overprint another. Once you have finished, type
(ESC/f1)  to return to Menu 2. All displays will  be  turned
off.
You  can  (and  should) use this menu to get information  on
enemy  units.  It  is  also useful  for  examining  terrain,
especially in active portions of the map, and as a source of
information  on  the  condition  of  friendly   units.   The
information  appearing  to right of the  map  describes  the
contents   of  the  hex  identified  by  the  cursor.   What
information you see depends upon what is in the hex.
The  majority of hexes will be empty, nor will an  objective
be  present. For these hexes, you will be told the  movement
point  cost for entering the hex, how much natural cover  or
protection  the  hex  will offer  to  an  occupant  and  the
expected  visibility or sighting into or  through  the  hex.
Below  this information, the terrain type is named and below
this  name  is a three-part iconic display. In the left-hand
compartment you are shown the terrain icon for the  hex.  In
the centre compartment you are shown a schematic summary  of
the  location  of  the  cursor  in  relation  to  the  whole
battlefield.  In the right-hand compartment the  nationality
icon of the side controlling the hex is displayed.
If  an  active objective is present in the hex,  the  middle
part  of  the report will display its details. You are  told
for  which turns the objective is active, how many turns you
have  held  the  objective to date and  the  number  of  VPs
awarded for its control, both on a per turn basis and at end
of game. The name of the objective appears above the terrain
type name.
If  an enemy unit is present in the hex, the top part of the
report  will  display its details. You are shown  an  iconic
representation of the enemy unit. Underneath  this  you  are
told  whether the unit is in line or column and  whether  it
appears  steady or shaken. A unit is shaken when its current
cohesion   value  is  3  or  less,  unless  it  occupies   a
fortification.
As  you can see by moving the cursor around the maps, all of
these displays are separate from each other. However, when a
friendly  unit  occupies  a hex,  all   information  on  the
display  except  for  the terrain name  and  the  three-part
iconic display are replaced with data on the friendly unit.
A brigade report contains the following information. A boxed
display  identifies the brigade, its type  and  its  current
order. At the top of the screen you are shown the HQ icon of
the formation to which the brigade is attached. The name  of
this HQ, its current order and the objective, if any, it has
been  directed  to are also displayed. Where two  objectives
are  shown,  you  should read this as the  second  objective
being  the real one. The first objective simply defines  the
line of march.
There are four separate icons directly above the brigade ID.
They  provide a simple summary of the status of the brigade.
From  left to right the icons display the brigade type icon,
whether  the  brigade is shattered or occupies a battlefield
entrenchment or fortification, whether the brigade is within
the  communication  range  of its superior  HQ  and  finally
whether  an  order has been issued to the brigade  for  this
turn.
Below  the  brigade ID are details of the brigade's  current
effective strength (rounded off to the nearest 100 men), the
number of guns attached to the brigade, the current cohesion
level  and  the  experience and leadership  ratings  of  the
brigade.
In Summary
A  summary  of  the  effects of the <MAP WALK>  menu  appear
below.
Control.  All terrain icons are replaced with the  Union  or
Confederate  control  icon. Hexes containing  units  do  not
display  a control icon; in every case a hex occupied  by  a
unit  will  be  controlled by that unit. It is difficult  to
overstate  how important hex control is in the play  of  the
game. Units in friendly territory are not usually visible to
the opposing player.
Roads. The road network is temporarily removed to reveal the
hex types underneath.
Clear.  All  units are temporarily removed from the  map  to
reveal the hex types underneath.
Name Objective. A cursor appears above the menu window. Type
in  the name of the objective you wish to examine. Once  the
computer  has  enough letters to distinguish it  from  other
objectives,  the  screen  and cursor  will  centre  on  that
objective.
Cycle Objective. The cursor appears on the nearest objective
and  from there the arrow keys are used to cycle the  cursor
from one objective to the next.
Name  Unit. A cursor appears above the menu window. Type  in
the  name of the unit you wish to examine. Once the computer
has  enough letters to distinguish it from other units,  the
screen and cursor will centre on that unit.

Menu 4 (Army Master)
This  is  a  branch  menu. The screen has  centred  on  your
present location; i.e. your Army HQ. If the Army HQ has  not
yet  arrived on the battlefield, the screen will  centre  on
its scheduled arrival hex. The Army ID is repeated above the
menu  window while the personal status of the Army commander
and  his  second in command is given below the  window.  The
army leaders can be OK, wounded, captured or killed.
You  use  this menu to choose the location you wish to  send
your  Army HQ to and to select the personal profile you wish
to adopt for the next hour of the battle.

Menu 5 (Move Army HQ)
This  is an action menu. There are four mechanisms by  which
you can move your Army HQ.
Position  the  cursor  over the <OBJECTIVE>  line  and  type
(RET). You will be allowed to name the objective you wish to
move  your Army HQ to or use the arrow keys to cycle through
the  available objectives until you locate the one  of  your
choice. Only objectives currently under friendly control may
be selected.
Position the cursor over the <CONTROL> line and type (RET).
The pinwheel appears in the menu window and you may select a
Corps  HQ  from it. The Army HQ will move to the  Corps  HQ.
This line will be overprinted with a solid bar if there  are
no corps under your command.
While an Army HQ occupies a hex adjacent to the Corps HQ and
its  last move order was to that Corps HQ, it assumes direct
command  of  the formations subordinate to the Corps  HQ  as
though they were its own.
If  none  of the above mechanisms will allow you  move  your
Army  HQ  to its desired location, position the cursor  over
the  <CURSOR> line and type (RET). You will be given control
over the cursor appearing on your current Army HQ location.
Use the arrow keys, the 1-6 keys or the I,J,K,M keys to move
the  cursor to the chosen location and then type (RET). Only
hexes  under friendly control may be selected. Your Army  HQ
has now been ordered to that location.
If  you  wish  to  cancel an Army HQ  move  or  to  halt  HQ
movement, select <STAND>.
Once  ordered  to  move, an Army HQ will take  the  quickest
route  to its chosen destination and become stationary  once
it   reaches   that  location.  Remember  that   the   staff
effectiveness  rating  of  your Army  HQ  will  be  slightly
reduced while it is moving. A careful commander will do  his
best to keep HQ movement to a minimum.
An Army HQ may directly supersede the orders of any friendly
brigade  within four hexes of its location as  explained  in
subsequent menu descriptions. Similarly, your Army HQ  staff
rating is temporarily reduced when enemy brigades are within
five  hexes of the HQ's location. You should keep these  two
points in mind when positioning your Army HQ.

Menu 6 (Personal Profile)
This is an action menu. Basically, you must choose the level
of  personal danger you wish to expose yourself to  for  the
next  hour.  There are pros and cons for each  choice.  Your
choice  will  remain  active  until  you  change  it  in   a
subsequent  hour  or  conditions  make  it  ineligible.  The
default profile is sensible.
Heroic.  You will only be allowed to choose this profile  if
there is a targeted friendly brigade within four hexes.  You
and  a  small escort are considered to have moved  into  the
front line to personally direct the battle.
For  the  hour  immediately following your  decision  to  be
heroic, there will be a temporary reduction in your Army  HQ
staff  value. As compensation, all targeted brigades  within
three  hexes  of your Army HQ will receive a  combat  bonus.
Leading  by  example  may  be the  only  way  to  prevent  a
disaster.  However, the cost of courage is  not  cheap.  You
will be exposed to enemy fire and bayonet point. You run the
risk   of  being  wounded,  incapacitated  or  even  killed.
Furthermore,  the  rest  of  your  Army  will  be  virtually
leaderless until you return to your Army HQ. You will not be
allowed  to select a heroic profile after the Army commander
has  suffered  either a killed, wounded or  captured  combat
result.
To  put this profile in perspective, you should find that in
most of your battles you never have to select it!
Bold.   You  will only be allowed to choose this profile  if
there  is a targeted friendly brigade within four hexes.  In
this case, you remain at your HQ and have chosen to maintain
a high profile for the purpose of stiffening your men.
A  small  combat  bonus  is conferred on  targeted  friendly
brigades  within  four hexes at a cost  of  some  danger  to
yourself and a slightly reduced staff efficiency
This profile should be selected when all is going well (i.e.
you   have  no  need  to  send  off  new  orders   to   your
subordinates)  and you wish to get your men off  to  a  good
start.
Sensible.  You have chosen to expose yourself to the  normal
level   of   danger   present  on  the  nineteenth   century
battlefield.  This is roughly equivalent to a 2%  chance  of
being  killed  or  wounded in a normal day's  fighting.  All
brigades  within  command radius of  your  Army  HQ  may  be
stiffened  by your presence or they may ignore you.  In  any
case, your staff effectiveness rating will not be affected.
Cautious.  The difference between a cautious profile  and  a
sensible  profile is small. By selecting a cautious  profile
you  are  reducing the risk of personal danger to zero.  You
also  give up all chance of inspiring your men. There is  no
change  to  your staff effectiveness rating. You should  not
confuse  cautious  with  cowardly; I'm  sure  there  are  no
Schimmelpfennigs (a luckless Union General found hiding in a
pig-sty after the Battle of Gettysburg) playing this game.
Which  of the two latter profiles you choose will depend  on
the  local situation. It really boils down to how lucky  you
feel.

Menu 7 (HQ Select)
This is a single function menu. The pinwheel appears in  the
menu window and you may use the arrow keys to select any  of
the  Corps or Division HQs directly subordinate to your Army
HQ.  Note that Division HQs subordinate to Corps HQs do  not
appear  in  the pinwheel unless your Army HQ is  temporarily
directing  the  Corps HQ as explained in  Menu  5.  Brigades
never  appear in the pinwheel. If the radio flag is on  then
Corps  headquarters are not used in the game.  The  pinwheel
bar  identifies the HQ which is centred on the  screen.  The
information available for each subordinate HQ is as follows.
The  top two lines of the screen show the ID of the  HQ  and
its current command, either offensive, defensive or reserve.
A HQ with an offensive command can have up to two objectives
displayed beneath its ID. A HQ with a defensive command will
have  one  objective displayed below its ID.  A  HQ  with  a
reserve  command  will have no objectives displayed  beneath
its ID.
There  are  four  separate  icons directly  above  the  menu
window. They provide a simple summary of the command  status
of  the  HQ.  From left to right the icons display  the  on-
screen HQ icon (corps or division), the HQ type (infantry or
cavalry),  whether the HQ is within the communication  range
of the Army HQ and finally whether a command has been issued
to  the  HQ for this turn. Obviously, a HQ cannot receive  a
command while it is out of communication.
Below  the menu window you are told the leadership and staff
ratings   of   the  HQ.  If  the  HQ  commander   has   been
incapacitated  (i.e. killed, wounded or captured)  then  the
leadership line will tell you there is a new commander.  You
are  not told how capable he is! To issue a command  to  the
selected HQ, type (RET).

Menu 8 (HQ Order)
This is an action menu. It is used to give the HQ its orders
for the next hour.
HQs  which  are out of communication with the Army  HQ  will
only  be  able to access the <MAP WALK> line in the menu.  A
message in the menu box will inform you that the HQ  is  out
of  command. HQs which are in communication with the Army HQ
will  have access to the full range of options in the  menu.
There  are  three command types, the effects  of  which  are
explained below. Note that the chosen command type will have
an effect on both communications and combat.
The  Offensive Command. An offensive command allows the Army
commander  to  select either a friendly or enemy  controlled
objective  as  the destination for the HQ.  Furthermore,  an
additional objective may be specified to define the route of
march.
Position the cursor on the <OFFENSIVE> line and type  (RET).
You can use the arrow keys or the name routine to locate the
chosen  objective. Type (RET) to accept the objective.  When
issuing  this command, you must specify the manoeuvre  point
as  the first objective and the intended destination as  the
second  objective. If you don't need to include a  manoeuvre
point,  you  must type (RET) twice. Once you have  completed
this routine, you are returned to Menu 7.
A  corps HQ which has been given this command will check its
subordinate  formations  and, where necessary,  amend  their
orders  to  comply  with the new command. How  quickly  this
happens;  indeed, whether it happens at all will  depend  on
the  leadership rating of the corps HQ. The corps HQ  itself
will  accompany one of its subordinates. Note  that  the  HQ
icon  is  not  allowed to enter enemy controlled  territory.
Remember that to supersede the authority of a corps HQ  over
its subordinates, you will have to select that corps HQ from
Menu 5 and wait until you are adjacent to it.
A division HQ which has been given this command will execute
it  as  soon as conditions allow. A poor division  commander
may  take longer to obey his command than a capable officer.
A  division in contact with the enemy may take some time  to
disengage.
Once  a  formation reaches its destination it will  `listen'
and  look  for enemy units. Should any be detected within  5
hexes,  then the formation will march to engage  them;  i.e.
they  will  march  to  the  sound of  the  guns.  Note  that
formations  subordinate  to a corps  HQ  may  not  all  take
exactly  the  same route as specified for the corps  HQ  nor
will  they  all  select the same objective; they  will  not,
however,  stray very far away. If there are  no  visible  or
audible enemy, then the formation will deploy to defend  its
objective(s).
Do  not attempt a major redeployment of engaged troops.  You
will almost certainly end up with a disaster.
The  Defensive Command. A defensive command allows the  Army
commander to select a friendly controlled objective  as  the
destination  for the HQ. You will not have access  to  enemy
controlled objectives.
Position the cursor on the <DEFENSIVE> line and type  (RET).
You can use the arrow keys or the name routine to locate the
chosen  objective. Type (RET) to accept the objective.  Once
you have completed this routine, you are returned to Menu 7.
The  command  is implemented much the same as the  offensive
command  except  that formations which  have  reached  their
destination will not march to the sound of the guns but will
deploy  and defend their objective. There is always a  small
chance that a commander who is out of communication with his
superior will spontaneously decide to march to the sound  of
the guns.
The   Reserve  Command.  A  reserve  command  instructs  the
subordinate HQ to withdraw from action and rest or simply to
wait in place until the appropriate time for its employment.
A  corps HQ with a reserve command will usually call off any
attacks made by its subordinates. Offensive commands will be
changed  to  defensive  or  reserve  commands  depending  on
circumstances.
A  division  HQ  will  instruct its  component  brigades  to
withdraw  from action where applicable and to  recover  lost
cohesion.  Brigade  responses  are  covered  in  the   notes
accompanying the description of Menus 10 and 11.
Note  that cavalry formations will generally continue  in  a
screening  role until a deterioration in their own condition
compels a withdrawal.
Do  not  confuse  the HQ reserve command  with  the  brigade
reserve order. They are quite different.
Special  Note.  On the first am turn of any  day  after  the
first day of a battle, you may be allowed access to all  the
corps  and division HQs subordinate to the army HQ. See  the
note in Chapter 6 for more details.
Menu 9 (Brigade Select)
This  is an information menu. Brigades are the combat  units
in the game. All of the actual fighting is done by them. The
orders which they can be given are generally dependent  upon
their  current circumstances. The information given here  on
each  brigade is exactly the same as you see when you access
the  brigade through the <MAP WALK> routine. Use  the  arrow
keys to cycle through the brigades.
When  the  <RADIO> flag is set for a scenario, all  brigades
can be accessed by the army HQ from this menu. When the flag
is  not  used  (thus recreating a more authentic  nineteenth
century  battlefield), only certain brigades can be accessed
by the army HQ through this menu.
These brigades are: all brigades which are directly attached
to  the  army  HQ and which are in communication  (including
brigades  directly  attached  to  a  corps  which  is  being
temporarily superseded by the army HQ); all brigades  within
4 hexes of the army HQ which are in communication, no matter
to whom they are subordinated.
Note  that  those  brigades  within  four  hexes  which  are
subordinated  to  a corps or division HQ  will  display  the
order  which their commander has chosen for them this  turn.
You may override the order if you wish.
Independent brigades attached directly to the army HQ  which
are  out of communication cannot be accessed at all and  you
will have to rely on their commanders to do the right thing.
Note  that  you may always access every brigade through  the
<MAP WALK> routine;  you just won't be able to tell it to do
anything.
Once  you  have selected the brigade you wish to  assign  an
order  to,  type (RET) to bring up the brigade  order  menu.
There  are two distinct brigade order menus. Which  one  you
get is determined by your proximity to enemy units.
A  brigade adjacent to an enemy brigade will always use  the
engaged  order menu. A brigade within two hexes of an  enemy
brigade  will  generally  use the engaged  order  menu.  The
exceptions are when a river, bridge or ford intervenes, when
the  friendly brigade is unsighted or when a prohibited  hex
intervenes.  A  brigade more than two hexes  away  from  all
enemy brigades will always use the manoeuvre order menu.
An  engaged  brigade is distinguished on the screen  from  a
to whom they are subordinated.
Note  that  those  brigades  within  four  hexes  which  are
subordinated  to  a corps or division HQ  will  display  the
order  which their commander has chosen for them this  turn.
You may override the order if you wish.
Independent brigades attached directly to the army HQ  which
are  out of communication cannot be accessed at all and  you
will have to rely on their commanders to do the right thing.
Note  that  you may always access every brigade through  the
<MAP WALK> routine;  you just won't be able to tell it to do
anything.
Once  you  have selected the brigade you wish to  assign  an
order  to,  type (RET) to bring up the brigade  order  menu.
There  are two distinct brigade order menus. Which  one  you
get is determined by your proximity to enemy units.
A  brigade adjacent to an enemy brigade will always use  the
engaged  order menu. A brigade within two hexes of an  enemy
brigade  will  generally  use the engaged  order  menu.  The
exceptions are when a river, bridge or ford intervenes, when
the  friendly brigade is unsighted or when a prohibited  hex
intervenes.  A  brigade more than two hexes  away  from  all
enemy brigades will always use the manoeuvre order menu.
An  engaged  brigade is distinguished on the screen  from  a
to whom they are subordinated.
Note  that  those  brigades  within  four  hexes  which  are
subordinated  to  a corps or division HQ  will  display  the
order  which their commander has chosen for them this  turn.
You may override the order if you wish.
Independent brigades attached directly to the army HQ  which
are  out of communication cannot be accessed at all and  you
will have to rely on their commanders to do the right thing.
Note  that  you may always access every brigade through  the
<MAP WALK> routine;  you just won't be able to tell it to do
anything.
Once  you  have selected the brigade you wish to  assign  an
order  to,  type (RET) to bring up the brigade  order  menu.
There  are two distinct brigade order menus. Which  one  you
get is determined by your proximity to enemy units.
A  brigade adjacent to an enemy brigade will always use  the
engaged  order menu. A brigade within two hexes of an  enemy
brigade  will  generally  use the engaged  order  menu.  The
exceptions are when a river, bridge or ford intervenes, when
the  friendly brigade is unsighted or when a prohibited  hex
intervenes.  A  brigade more than two hexes  away  from  all
enemy brigades will always use the manoeuvre order menu.
An  engaged  brigade is distinguished on the screen  from  a
manoeuvre  brigade by the fact that the intended  target  of
the engaged brigade is identified by the battle cursor.

Menu 10 (Engaged Order)
This  is  an action menu. The engaged order menu appears  at
the bottom of the information panel. Some of the information
concerning the brigade has changed.
The  top  four  lines show the type of enemy unit  targeted,
whether   it  is  in  column  or  line  formation  (mounted/
dismounted  for cavalry, limbered/unlimbered for  artillery)
and whether it is steady or shaken. A brigade will be shaken
if  its  cohesion  is  less  than  4  unless  it  is  in   a
fortification.
The  four  status icons and the brigade ID  do  not  change.
There   is   some  additional  information  concerning   the
equipment  of  the brigade. You are told both  the  type  of
small arms and the type of artillery used by the brigade.
The <MAP WALK> routine is identical to the routine available
through  Menu  2.  Below the <MAP WALK> line  are  the  four
options available to an engaged brigade.
Note  that  a  surprised  brigade will  have  these  options
replaced  with a message that informs him of his  bad  luck.
Only  brigades  moving in column can be surprised.  Brigades
which are encamped are always considered to be in column for
this purpose.
To  select an option, position the cursor on the appropriate
line  and type (RET). You will be returned directly to  Menu
9. The four options are.
Assault.  This option is available to all brigades  adjacent
to  their  targeted enemy opponent unless a  river  hex-side
intervenes. It is a full-scale brigade charge combined  with
a volley of musketry. The targeted enemy brigade will almost
always  fire  before  the charge goes  in  so  that  a  well
positioned,   determined  defender  is  very  difficult   to
dislodge  on a one-on-one basis. If you are not adjacent  to
your  opponent, you will be denied access to  the  <ASSAULT>
line.
Skirmish.  This  option is always available when  the  enemy
brigade  is  two hexes away. It may or may not be  available
when the enemy brigade is adjacent. Your brigade is told  to
stand  and  fire at its opponent when he is adjacent  or  to
send  a  couple of regiments forward to harass your opponent
if he is two hexes distant.
This  is  the order which gives you the best chance to  fire
first,  particularly  if you did not move  in  the  previous
turn.  The artillery component of a brigade cannot  fire  if
the brigade moved in the previous turn unless the brigade is
cavalry.
If   you   are  adjacent  to  your  opponent,   not   in   a
fortification, not separated by a bridge, ford or river hex-
side  and  the  combined cover values of your hex  and  your
opponent's hex are less than 4, you will be denied access to
the <SKIRMISH> line.
Advance.  This  option is always available  when  the  enemy
brigade  is two hexes away. It is also available  when  your
opponent is adjacent and separated from you by a river  hex-
side.  Where  possible, the order will move you adjacent  to
your opponent. The brigade will deliver a volley of musketry
but  generally not until all stationary brigades have  fired
first.  Use  this order to get into position to  deliver  an
assault.
Withdraw.  This is the only option which is always available
to  an  engaged brigade, regardless of whether it is one  or
two  hexes  away. The brigade will attempt to  move  out  of
contact  with both its opponent and any other enemy present.
A  cavalry  brigade  given a withdraw order  will  fight  as
though it had a skirmish order but move as though it  had  a
withdraw order.

Menu 11 (Manoeuvre Order)
This is an action menu. The manoeuvre order menu appears  at
the bottom of the information panel. Some of the information
concerning the brigade has changed.
The  information above the brigade ID does not change. Below
the  brigade ID you are told whether the brigade is in  line
or      column     (mounted/dismounted     for      cavalry,
limbered/unlimbered for artillery), its size  and  artillery
strength,  the number of movement points available  for  the
coming  turn  and the maximum number of hexes  it  may  move
regardless of its MP allowance.
The <MAP WALK> routine is identical to the routine available
through  Menu  2.  Below the <MAP WALK>  line  are  the  six
options  available  to  a manoeuvre  brigade.  Note  that  a
manoeuvre brigade cannot be surprised.
Column/Objective.  A brigade attached  to  a  division  will
display the <COLUMN> line, a brigade attached to a corps  or
army HQ will display the <OBJECTIVE> line.
This  means that a brigade attached to a division cannot  be
given a separate objective; placing it in column will direct
it   to  the  current  objective  of  its  division  HQ.  An
independent brigade may be given a separate objective.
Position the cursor on the <COLUMN> line and type (RET). You
will be returned directly to Menu 9. Position the cursor  on
the <OBJECTIVE> line and type (RET). The cursor will move to
the map and centre on the brigade's last objective. If there
is  no last objective, the cursor will centre on the nearest
objective. Use the arrow keys or the name routine to  locate
the  chosen  objective and type (RET). You will be  returned
directly to Menu 9.
Deploy. This order allows the commander a one hex radius  in
which to reposition the brigade. Position the cursor on  the
<DEPLOY>  line and type (RET). The cursor will move  to  the
map  and centre on the brigade. The brigade icon will  flash
alternately with an indicator icon to show the direction the
brigade will move in.
Use  the arrow keys to redirect the indicator icon and  type
(RET)  when  it  is facing in the chosen direction.  Once  a
direction has been chosen, the indicator icon will disappear
to  be replaced with an action icon over the chosen hex.  In
the  ensuing  turn,  the  brigade will  move  into  the  hex
identified by the action icon.
Regroup. A brigade with a regroup order will attempt to move
as  quickly  as  possible to its superior HQ.  Position  the
cursor  over the <REGROUP> line and type (RET). You will  be
returned directly to Menu 9. A brigade to which the division
HQ  is  attached cannot regroup; rather it will act  as  the
locus for regrouping by other brigades in the division.
Stand. A brigade with a stand order will stay exactly  where
it  is.  Position the cursor over the <STAND> line and  type
(RET). You will be returned directly to Menu 9.
Reserve.  A  brigade  must  be in reserve  to  recover  lost
cohesion.  Never miss an opportunity to put a  brigade  into
reserve  if  its  cohesion is fair or  worse.  Position  the
cursor  over the <RESERVE> line and type (RET). You will  be
returned  directly to Menu 9. Brigades in reserve  will  not
move  and  are  automatically surprised if  they  enter  the
engaged  order routines. Shattered brigades cannot  go  into
reserve  if  their cohesion is 4 or greater. Other  brigades
cannot go into reserve if their cohesion is 6 or greater.
Brigades  with objective/column or regroup orders will  move
in  column  (mounted for cavalry, unlimbered for artillery).
If  they  are  forced into the engaged order routines  while
they  have  these  orders, there is a  chance  they  may  be
surprised.  The  higher the leadership and  experience,  the
lower the chance of being surprised. A surprised brigade  is
considered  to  have  had insufficient time  to  deploy  for
combat and suffers accordingly.
Battlefield  entrenchments can be dug  by  certain  infantry
brigades. A side must be specified in the briefing setup  as
capable  of entrenchment. If this is the case, then infantry
brigades which do not move or fire in a particular turn  may
dig   a  battlefield  entrenchment.  The  entrenchment  will
disappear as soon as the brigade leaves the hex or is  given
an  assault order. Shattered brigades will not benefit  from
entrenchments.  Battlefield  entrenchments  are  treated  as
fortifications with a value ranging from 1 - 3.

Menu 12 (Options)
There are five options available.
The  <RESULTS>  line will tell you the final  score  if  the
scenario were to end at this point. Hit any key to return to
the options menu.
The  <ADVICE>  line will display a couple of  paragraphs  of
handy  hints for the scenario. Hit any key to return to  the
options menu.
The <RESIGN> line operates as explained in Menu 2.
The <SOUND> line toggles the sound on/off.
The  <AUTO SAVE> line activates the Auto Save feature.  When
Auto  Save is on, the scenario in play will be saved at  the
end of each turn. Only one file is maintained and it is over-
written  each turn with the current turn. This file  can  be
loaded using the <LOAD AUTO> line in Start Menu C.

4. THE GAME SYSTEMS
The major systems which operate within the game are sighting
(visibility),   communications,   combat,    cohesion    and
manoeuvre.  There  is quite a bit of inter-relation  between
these  systems but for ease of clarification they have  been
discussed separately.
To  play the game, all you need to know is what the menus do
and  how to use them. To understand what is going on  behind
the  scenes and to play the game well, you should read  this
chapter carefully.

Sighting
After a couple of introductory games, most people will  want
to  play the game with the <EXPOSED> flag switched off.  Not
knowing  where all your opponent's troops are,  not  knowing
how  many he has, add a completely new dimension to the play
of the game.
The  sighting rules work like this. There are two mechanisms
by  which a unit may be sighted. The first is by the eyeball
contact of a friendly unit, the second is by a patrol picket
represented  in the game by the hex control  icons  you  can
observe in the <MAP WALK> routine.
Each  terrain type on the map has a cover value assigned  to
it.  These values can be found from the <MAP WALK>  routine.
The  computer  sums the cover values between  each  friendly
unit  and every enemy unit within five hexes, including both
the  hex  occupied by the friendly unit and the hex occupied
by the enemy unit.
The  sighting value is increased by 4-15 points for each  of
the  following conditions which apply; overcast, rain, snow,
dawn, dusk, night, heavy fog and light fog.
The  sighting  value is increased by 8 for each  intervening
hex.  A random number of 0-7 is added. If the final sighting
value   is   less  than  56,  the  enemy  unit  is  sighted.
Furthermore, the maximum sighting range at night or in heavy
fog  is  one hex. As you can see, it is possible for a  unit
which  sights  an  enemy unit to remain undetected  by  that
enemy unit!
A  sighting  check is made at the end of each turn  and  all
units  which  have  been sighted by this  mechanism  are  so
flagged and become visible on the map.
The  second  mechanism for sighting has nothing to  do  with
enemy  units or terrain type. Whenever a friendly unit moves
adjacent to an enemy control icon, it is flagged as picketed
and immediately becomes visible on the screen.
Simultaneously with this, as the friendly unit moves  across
the  map, it switches the control icon of every hex adjacent
to its path except hexes across a river, bridge or ford hex-
side  and hexes adjacent to an enemy unit. For example,  you
would  only see the first unit of a column of troops  moving
along a road which was enemy controlled at the start of  the
turn.  It  would be up to you to decide if the force  was  a
single brigade or a whole corps!
A  picket  check  is made every time a unit  moves  and  the
picket  flag  is  set  as  soon  as  a  positive  result  is
triggered.
At  the  beginning of each turn, the sighting status of  all
units  is  updated.  All units with the  picketed  flag  set
become  unsighted.  All  units with the  sighting  flag  set
become picketed.

Communications
When  you play the game with the <RADIO> flag set, there  is
no need to worry about communications at all. You are always
in  control  of  every HQ and brigade in your force.  Again,
however,  after you have played a couple of games, you  will
want to experience a more authentic battle environment.
Switching  the <RADIO> flag off will introduce  you  to  the
frustrations  and  challenges of the  pre-twentieth  century
battlefield.  With  both  the <RADIO>  and  <EXPOSED>  flags
switched off, you can be sure of a very exciting experience.
At  the beginning of each turn, every brigade and HQ on  the
board except for the army HQ makes a check with its superior
formation. As a result of this check, every brigade  and  HQ
will  be  either  in communication or out of  communication.
Army HQs are always considered in communication. Troops  yet
to   arrive   on   the  battlefield  are   always   out   of
communication.
Whether  a  brigade  or  HQ is in communication  or  out  of
communication is displayed in its status report as described
in Menus 7 and 9.
The mechanism by which this judgement is made is as follows.
The  distance  between  the unit and its  superior  unit  is
measured in hexes and cross-referenced to the communications
table.  The  number  obtained is the  base  chance  measured
against  a random 15 (i.e. a number between 0 and  15)  that
the unit will be in communication.
There  are  several variables which modify the  base  chance
before  it  is checked against the random number. Note  that
the base chance can never fall below 0; i.e. there is always
at   least  1  chance  in  16  that  a  unit  will   be   in
communication.
Time of Day. Night (-4), dawn, dusk (-2).
Weather. Rain, snow, heavy fog (-3), drizzle, light  fog  (-
1).
Staff Rating. Add the staff value of the testing unit's HQ.
Corps Modifiers. Infantry corps (0), cavalry corps (+4)
Division  Modifiers. Infantry division (0), cavalry division
(+6), army HQ (+2), corps HQ (0).
Brigade  Modifiers. Infantry brigade (0), mounted  infantry,
artillery brigade (+6), cavalry brigade (+8), army HQ  (+2),
corps HQ (1), division HQ (0).
Miscellaneous  Modifiers. For army HQs: -2 if enemy  brigade
within 4 hexes, -1 if moved last turn, -3 if heroic,  -1  if
bold; for corps HQs: -1 if enemy brigade within three hexes,
-1 if offensive command.

First am Turn Provisions
On  the  first move turn of each day after the first day  of
the  battle,  there  may be a special opportunity  to  issue
commands  to  corps and division HQs. If there have  been  6
consecutive  no  move  turns (i.e. the  move  value  in  the
briefing  routine  is set to 0, then  an  army  HQ  will  be
allowed access to all on-map HQs for command purposes.  This
is  to  simulate  the nightly briefing which would  (should)
have occurred.
An army commander will have the most control over his forces
when  his  army  HQ  is not engaged, is stationary  and  the
weather  is good. The more you move around, the more closely
you  get involved in the action, then the more tenuous  will
be your control over your troops.
You   must  strike  the  right  balance  between  committing
yourself personally and directing your army efficiently. The
player  who does this consistently better than his  opponent
will win.

Combat
After  you  have issued commands and orders to your  troops,
the  first on-screen events you will witness after selecting
the <RUN 5> line are the combat reports. The target unit  of
each  battle  is  identified by  the  action  icon  and  all
brigades attacking it are identified by indicator icons.
The  information panel describes the battle represented  on-
screen  by  the  combat  icons. The  attacker's  information
always appears above the defender's information.
The  combined  strength of all attacking brigades  is  shown
together  with the defending brigade's strength. The  combat
result is shown as a number of hits and a cohesion loss.
The relationship between hits and cohesion is detailed later
in this section and an explanation of cohesion provided in a
later section. Leaders may be killed, wounded or captured.
Firstly,  you  need to know who fights who,  in  what  order
these  fights are carried out and what factors are  used  to
calculate fire and melee values.
Target Selection. Only brigades select targets. Brigades and
HQs may be selected as targets. Each brigade must select one
eligible  enemy unit within its range as its target.  Target
selecting  priorities are as follows. Note that occasionally
they will be violated to reflect the uncertainty of war.
Each brigade will select the closest enemy brigade.
Each  brigade  will select an untargeted  enemy  brigade  in
preference to an already targeted enemy brigade.
Each  brigade  will  select  a  deployed  enemy  brigade  in
preference to an enemy brigade in column.
Obviously, this routine is used only when there is more than
one potential target.
In summary, this means that adjacent enemy units will almost
always  be chosen in preference to more distant enemy  units
and  that  multiple  brigades cannot gang  up  on  a  single
brigade unless it is alone.
Sequence  of  Attack.  Each  brigade  fires  and/or   melees
separately.  For  convenience of combat reporting,  however,
all  attacks  against  a  single unit  are  displayed  as  a
combined attack. The screen would look too messy if  we  did
it  any other way. We tried several display systems. What we
ended  up  with is by far the best. There is no  distinction
between sides in these combat routines.
Not  every brigade which selected an opponent in the  target
selection  routine is actually eligible to attack. Artillery
brigades  which  moved in the preceding  turn  cannot  fire.
Similarly, the artillery component of non-artillery brigades
which moved last turn will not contribute to their brigade's
fire value unless the brigade type is cavalry.
All   other  attacking  brigades  fall  into  one  of   four
categories.  All  brigades within one category  will  attack
before  any  brigades in subsequent categories will  attack.
Within  a  category,  every brigade consults  a  formula  to
determine the order of attack.
The four categories are.
(i).  Infantry  and  mounted infantry  in  line,  dismounted
cavalry   (unless  with  assault  orders)   and   unlimbered
artillery which did not move in the preceding turn.
(ii).  Infantry  and  mounted infantry in  line,  dismounted
cavalry   (unless  with  assault  orders)   and   unlimbered
artillery which did move in the preceding turn.
(iii). Infantry, mounted infantry and cavalry which has been
surprised (i.e. in column).
(iv).  Cavalry with assault orders. For game purposes,  this
is  considered to be a cavalry charge. Note that any brigade
with a small arms type which has a range of 0 also fits into
this  category. There are no such unit types  in  Civil  War
battles.  A Zulu impi, for example, would have a small  arms
type with 0 range.
Within  each  category, the mechanism used to determine  the
sequence of attack is calculated from the following formula.
Cohesion + 0.5 (lead. + exp.) + brigade type + brigade order
+ rnd (3)
Where  brigade  type is artillery (+4), all others  (0)  and
brigade  order  is skirmish (+6), assault or  advance  (+2),
withdraw  (0). Note that a cavalry brigade with  a  withdraw
order  is treated as though it had a skirmish order for  the
purpose of determining the sequence of attack.
In  summary,  every attacking brigade has  been  assigned  a
position  in  the firing order. Properly deployed,  prepared
troops will generally fire first. And, as you will see  from
the   firing   mechanics,  firing  first  is  a   tremendous
advantage.
The Fire Value. Each brigade determines its fire/melee value
according to the following data.
(i). Artillery Brigades
     (a). Add all battery strength points
     (b). Add 1 for each point of experience above 4
     (c). Add 1 for each point of leadership above 4
     (d). Add rate of fire value
     (e). Add effectiveness value (if opponent is adjacent)
       (f).  Add  penetration  value  (if  opponent  is  not
adjacent)
     (g). Subtract 2 for every intervening hex
      (h).  Subtract half of the cover value of the  firer's
hex (unless in a fortification)
      (i).  Subtract  the cover value of  the  target's  hex
(unless  in  a  fortification or the target has  an  assault
order)
      (j).  Subtract twice the fortification  value  of  the
target's hex (unless the target has an assault order)
All  artillery brigades have a maximum fire value  of  6  in
rain, snow, heavy fog or at night. Artillery brigades with a
withdraw order may not have a fire value greater than 8.
The  fire value of the artillery component of other  brigade
types is calculated in the same way.
(ii). Infantry, Mounted Infantry and Cavalry Brigades
Note  that  cavalry  brigades with assault  orders  and  all
brigades   with  a  small  arms  range  of  0  are   treated
differently.
      (a).  Add all of the first 8 strength points, half  of
the  next 8 strength points and one quarter of the remaining
strength points
     (b). Add 1 for each point of experience above 4
     (c). Add 1 for each point of leadership above 4
     (d). Add 1 for every regiment in the brigade above 4
     (e). Add fire value of the small arms type
      (f). Add twice the melee value of small arms type  (if
order is assault)
      (g).  Subtract half of the cover value of the  firer's
hex (unless in a fortification)
      (h).  Subtract  the cover value of  the  target's  hex
(unless  in  a  fortification or the target has  an  assault
order)
      (i).  Subtract twice the fortification  value  of  the
target's hex (unless the target has an assault order)
Surprised brigades cannot have a fire value greater than  2.
Brigades  with  a withdraw order cannot have  a  fire  value
greater  than 8. Note that cavalry brigades with a  withdraw
order  are  treated  as though they had  a  skirmish  order.
Brigades  with a small arms range of 0 cannot  have  a  fire
value greater than 2. Brigades have a maximum fire value  of
6 in rain, snow, heavy fog or at night. Brigades firing at a
non adjacent opponent have their fire value reduced to 25%.
(iii). Cavalry Brigades with Assault Orders
This group includes all brigades with a small arms range  of
0 who are assaulting.
     (a). Add all  strength points
     (b). Add 1 for each point of experience above 4
     (c). Add 1 for each point of leadership above 4
     (d). Add 1 for every regiment in the brigade above 4
      (e). Add twice the melee value of small arms type  (if
current order is assault)
     (h). Subtract twice the cover value of the target's hex
(unless  in  a  fortification or the target has  an  assault
order)
      (i).  Subtract three times the fortification value  of
the target's hex (unless the target has an assault order)
Brigades have their fire/melee value reduced by 50% in rain,
snow, heavy fog or at night.
As  a  final  modifier,  the current cohesion  rating  of  a
brigade affects its fire value. Cohesion value 6 or 7  =  no
effect, 4 or 5 = 75%, 2 or 3 = 50%, 1 = no fire value.
All brigades with an assault order are eligible to receive a
combat  bonus  if  a heroic army commander  is  within  four
hexes.  This  bonus  can be as much  as  50%  again  of  the
brigade's fire value.
The  fire  value is the principal factor used in calculating
how much cohesion a brigade loses as a result of being fired
upon. Cohesion is explained in the following section.

Cohesion
The  gradual  reduction  in  a  brigade's  fighting  ability
throughout  the  game  is  measured  through  a  fluctuating
Cohesion  Value.  The  cohesion  value  is  decreased  as  a
consequence of taking losses from combat. The cohesion value
can only be increased while a brigade is in reserve.
As  soon as a brigade's cohesion value drops to 0, then  the
brigade is removed from play.
As  soon  as  a  brigade's cohesion value  drops  to  2,  it
shatters.  There  is no additional effect when  a  shattered
brigade's cohesion value drops to 2.
If the shatter flag in the brigade creation screen is set to
1,   then  the  brigade  begins  the  game  in  a  shattered
condition. If the flag is set to 0, then the brigade  begins
the game in a normal condition.
A  normal brigade may recover to a cohesion value  of  6.  A
shattered  brigade  may recover to a cohesion  value  of  4.
During night turns, normal brigades may sometimes recover to
a  cohesion  rating  of 7, shattered brigades  may  reach  a
cohesion rating of 5.
A brigade's cohesion value can only drop as a consequence of
sustaining  casualties in combat. Each time a brigade  is  a
target  for enemy fire, it immediately checks to  see  if  a
cohesion  value loss has occurred. This loss is  implemented
immediately.
The  procedure  for calculating a brigade's  cohesion  value
loss   is  given  below.  Note  that  HQs  do  not  have   a
vulnerability value. If they are subject to enemy fire, they
make an automatic retreat of 2-4 hexes.
Step  One. Calculate the target's vulnerability value  using
the following formula.
Current  Cohesion   + 0.5 (lead. + exp.) +  brigade  type  +
brigade size + rnd 3
where  brigade type is artillery (8), infantry (6),  mounted
infantry,  cavalry (4), all surprised brigades, all  reserve
brigades (0) and brigade size is 1-4 SPs (0), 5-8 SPs (1), 9
16 SPs (3), 17+ SPs (6).
Step  Two.  Compare  the fire value with  the  vulnerability
value to obtain the number of hits scored. Table 2 gives the
details.
Each  hit  scored  is  one random (1) chance  of  causing  a
cohesion loss except against a brigade with a withdraw order
or  a brigade with the encamped flag set. In the former case
it  is one random (3) chance of causing a cohesion loss  and
in  the  latter case it is an automatic loss of one cohesion
point.
Step  Three.  At the completion of all combat, each  brigade
fired on makes a cohesion check to see if its current orders
are over-ridden. The test is:
Current Cohesion + 0.5 (lead. + exp.)  + fortification value
+  tactical factor + confidence factor  + command factor   +
current order  + previous turn  + rnd 7
where  tactical factor is fired at through frontal hex-sides
(4),  enfiladed (0), the confidence factor is the number  of
friendly  brigades within three hexes minus  the  number  of
enemy  brigades within 2 hexes, the command factor is heroic
army  leader  in range (3), bold army leader in  range  (2),
sensible  army leader in range (1), cautious army leader  in
range (0), current order is assault (2), withdraw (-2).
Note  that an account is also made for events which occurred
in  the  previous turn. Friendly brigades within four  hexes
and  enemy  brigades  within 3 hexes  may  have  an  affect.
Subtract 1 for each friendly brigade which retreated, 3  for
each  friendly  brigade  which  shattered  and  7  for  each
friendly  brigade  which was KIA'd. Add  2  for  each  enemy
brigade either retreated, shattered or KIA'd.
The maximum negative value of this variable is -7. There  is
no limit as to how large it may be. Finally, the effect of a
KIA'd brigade may persist for up to two turns.
(a).  If  this value is 0 - 6, then a shattered  brigade  is
eliminated, all other brigades become shattered and flee 3-4
hexes to the rear.
(b). If this value is 7 - 10, then the brigade shatters  and
flees 3-4 hexes to the rear.
(c).  If  this  value is 11 - 15, then brigade retreats  1-2
hexes to the rear.
(d). If this value is 16+, then there is no effect.
Remember  that independent of these results, as  soon  as  a
brigade's cohesion value drops to 2 it will shatter  and  as
soon  as it drops to 0 it will disappear (KIA) for the  rest
of the game.

Manoeuvre
Once the last combat report has been displayed, the movement
routines  are  activated. The computer determines  in  which
order   the  units  will  move.  This  is  based  on  staff,
experience, leadership, cohesion, current order and a  small
random component. If necessary, the movement routine will be
divided  into  a  series of pulses. This is to  ensure  that
every  unit  has  the maximum opportunity  to  complete  its
movement without being blocked by friendly units.
The  menu  window will display the word <running> throughout
the  duration  of  the movement routines.  The  screen  will
centre on each unit as it moves. Note that there will be  no
indication of the movement of unsighted units. The number of
movement points available to a unit can be reduced by any of
the  following; bad weather, time of day, low cohesion, poor
leadership   or   just  plain  bad  luck.   Units   out   of
communication are more likely to lose MPs.

6. WINNING THE GAME
The  game  will  end  with the completion  of  the  movement
routine on the last turn. The victory screen will appear and
summarise the players' performance.
Additionally, players may elect to end the game at any  time
by selecting the <RESIGN> line from Menu 2. If this is done,
victory  points  will be displayed as though  the  game  was
scheduled to end on that turn.
