Operation Market Garden Page 
Operation Market Garden
 1.0 INTODUCTION................................1
 2.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY...........................1
 3.0 WEATHER DETERMINATION PHASE................2
 4.0 AIR STRIKE PHASE...........................2
 5.0 SUPPLY PHASE...............................2
 6.0 REINFORCEMENTS.............................3
 7.0 UNIT BREAKDOWN/BUILDUP PHASE...............3
 8.0 OPERATION PHASES...........................3
 9.0 COMBAT.....................................6
10.0 VICTORY CONDITIONS.........................6
11.0 STRATEGY AND TACTICS.......................6
12.0 HISTORICAL COMMENTARY......................7
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
On September 17, 1944 the largest daylight airborne operation in 
history was conducted in Holland. Thirty thousand paratroopers were landed in 
an effort to seize and hold a highway over canals and rivers that led 
straight into the Ruhr valley of Germany. Breaking out from the front lines 
was a full armored corps determined to drive up that open highway into the 
heart of Germany. OPERATION MARKET GARDEN simulates this combined airborne 
and armored assault fostered by Field Marshal Montgomery.
1.1 Description of Action
Each game turn represents a full day of operations. These operations 
include supply, air strikes, buildups and breakdowns of battalions and 
regiments, artillery barrage plots, bridge blowing and building, 
fortifications, mode changes, unit movement, and combat allocation and 
resolution.
1.2 Talking to tbe Computer
To seIect a routine from a menu or answer a Yes/No guestion, Just press 
the desired key.
1.3 Saving a Game
At the end of the Reinforcement Phase and every phase thereafter, the 
computer will allow the player(s) to save the game in progress. You will need 
a scratch disk to store the saved game data. Save game disks for the AppIe 
must be initiatized for SSI use during a game by following instructions 
included in the game program. Atari and Commodore 64 users may use any disk 
that has been properly formatted for use on their computer or format a disk 
from within the program. Once a game is saved, you will be able to restart it 
at the point where you left off.
1.4 Game Scale and Map
The game begins September 17, 1944 and ends September 26, 1944 for a 
total of ten turns. Units in the game range from battaIions to divisions.
The map includes parts of Holland and Germany superimposed on a 32 by 
31 hexagon grid. Each hexagon contains a specific terrain type (clear, rough, 
forest, and town) and represents an area of about two miles. Hexagons with a 
small white dot in the middle show Allied ownership. German ownership is 
shown by a hexagon with no white dot. Ownership changes when a unit moves 
into an enemy hexagon (very important for supply). Rivers and canals are 
represented by blue hexsides. Hexagons connected by a road have white 
hexsides in common.
The actual playing field of the map is bordered by white hexsides. Only 
German units are allowed to move outside of the bordered area, representing 
strategic movement. Allied zones of control do not extend past the border nor 
may Allied units attack across it
1.5 Units
The various units depicted in the game are graphically represented by 
standard military symbols for type and size (see Unit Symbol Legend in next 
column). Units are given a number of characteristics: unit and parent unit 
designations, combat strength, efficiency, fortification leve;, suppIy 
status, mode, command status, stacking value, and operation points.
The standard unit of the game is the battalion. These battalions may 
build up into regimental units which in turn may break down into component 
battalions. Some understrength regiments may build up into divisional units. 
Various support and independent units have also been included. Possible unit 
build-ups and break-downs are found in the Order of Battle Chart. 
Abbreviations used in unit designations are inctuded at the back of the 
rulebook.
1.6 Starting the Game (Commodore 64)
To begin the game, insert the the game disk and type LOAD"*",8 and 
press <RETURN>. When READY appears, type RUN and press <RETURN>.
1.7 Starting the Game (Atari)
Remove all cartridges from your computer. To begin the game, boot up 
the Scenario side of the disk (800XL owners will have to hold down the OPTION 
key when they turn on their computer to boot the game). After selecting the 
starting values for your game, you will be told to insert the Game Side of 
your disk.
1.8 Starting the Game (Apple)
To begin the game, boot your game disk and the game will start 
automatically. If you are using an AppIe II wIth PascaI you must first use 
your BASICS disk. If you are using an Apple III you must first go into Apple 
II emuIation mode. If you are using the Apple IIe keep the CAPS LOCK key 
pressed down throughout the game.
1.9 Parts Inventory
Your game should contain the following Parts:
a. Game box
b. Rule book
c. One 5 1/4" game disk
d. Two data cards
2.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY
OPERATION MARKET GARDEN is a two-sided game:  Allied  vs. German.  The 
Allied forces must be commanded by the human player. The German forces may be 
commanded by either a human or the computer.
2.1 Determing Conditions of Play
At the start of the game the player(s) must determine the conditions 
under which the game wilI be played from the menu below:
1. NEW GAMESAVED GAME
2. LEVEL OF PLAY1 2 3 4
3. HISTORICALFREE SET-UP
4. SOLITAIRETWO PLAYER
5. INTERMEDIATEADVANCED
6. HIDDEN UNITSNON-HIDDEN
7. RANDOM WEATHER HISTORICAL
If you choose a saved game, all options will be pre-determined by that 
saved game.
The level of play represents handicaps given to the Allied forces. 
Level four is the easiest level and level one is the hardest. Level three is 
the historicaI level.
The HISTORICAL/FREE SET-UP allows the player(s) to use the historic 
drop zones or choose their own. Drop zones may not be targeted in city, 
forest, or enemy occupied hexes. Glider units will only land in town or clear 
terrain hexes. Units landing in rough terrain will suffer losses. Each 
airborne formation's supply source hex will also be designated by the player 
and will become the drop hex of reinforcing airborne units. Be sure to land 
someone in the hex designated as the supply hex to change ownership. When 
using this option the starting German unit locations will be altered.
The INTERMEDIATE game is less complex and easier to play than the 
ADVANCED game. The ADVANCED game adds on options and features to the 
INTERMEDIATE game. Such differences are explained in the pertinent sections 
of the rulebook.
The HIDDEN UNITS option allows you to play a game where units of the 
opposite side are hidden. Such units remain hidden unless they find 
themselves next to enmey units.
At the beginning of each turn, players are allowed to set the time 
delay of messages displayed on the computer screen by typing a number from 0 
to 9.
Players may choose random or historical weather.
2.2 Historical Set-Up
At the start of the game, the computer will assign all combat forces to 
their locations on the afternoon of September 17, when the Allies launched 
their offensive.
2.3 Sequence of Play
 1. Weather Determination Phase
 2. Air Strike Phase
 3. Supply Phase
 4. Reinforcement Phase
 5. Buildup/Breakdown Phase
 6. Allied 1st Operation Phase
 7. Allied 1st Combat Phase
 8. German 1st Operation Phase
 9. German 1st Combat Phase
10. Allied 2nd Operation Phase
11. Allied 2nd Combat Phase
12. German 2nd Operation Phase
13. German 2nd Combat Phase
3.0 WEATHER DETERMINATION PHASE
Weather affects the number of air points that each side receives. It 
also determines the number of reinforcing airborne units able to drop.
3.1 Weather Conditions and Probabilities
There are three weather conditions: CLEAR, CLOUDY, and OVERCAST. The 
first turn is always CLEAR. Thereafter there is an 18% chance of CLEAR 
weather, a 37% chance of CLOUDY, and a 45% chance of OVERCAST. When using 
historical weather, the following chart is used:
  DATEWEATHER CONDITON
-------------------------------
Sept. 17Cloudy
Sept. 18Cloudy
Sept. 19Overcast
Sept. 20Overcast
Sept. 21Clear
Sept. 22Overcast
Sept. 23Clear
Sept. 24Cloudy
Sept. 25Cloudy
Sept. 26Clear
3.2  Effects of Weather on Air Points and Reinforcing Airborne Units
The Allies receive eight air points on CLEAR turns, four on CLOUDY, and 
zero on OVERCAST turns. The Germans receive two air points on CLEAR turns, 
one on CLOUDY, and zero on OVERCAST turns. If avaiIabIe. ten airborne units 
may drop during CLEAR and five during CLOUDY weather (see Order of Battle 
Chart).
4.0  AIR STRIKE PHASE
During this phase, players will execute ground attacks and air 
interdiction.
4.1 Air Mission Menu
When players receive wair points, a menu will appear with the following 
commands available:
(0-6): Centers the screen. 1-6 moves the cursor in the indicated direction.
(Q)uit: Exits the menu.
(I)nterdiction: Adds an air point to interdiction of enemy movement (Allies 
only).
(G)round: Executes an attack on the hex beneath the cursor.
4.2  Interdiction (Allies only)
Every air point allocated to interdiction acts to reduce operation 
points received by enemy units. The more points allocated the greater the 
effect. Enemy units are randomly affected.
4.3 Ground Attack
A single unit in a hex has about a 40% chance of being hit. Stacked 
units and units in travel mode have a higher chance of being hit. A ground 
attack will generally reduce a unit's combat strength, efficiency. and 
operation points. A unit will never be eliminated or retreated as a result of 
an air ground attack. Allied air strikes may be conducted no further than six 
hexes from a unit of the 30th Corps or a unit linked to the 30th Corps. The 
Germans may not ground attack a unit of the 30th Corps or linked to the 3Oth 
Corps.
5.0 SUPPLY PHASE
Units may be in four supply states: SUPPLIED, OUT OF COMMUNICATIONS. 
UNSUPPLIED, or ISOLATED. Supply states are determined by the ground and 
airborne supply traces.
5.1 Ground Supply Trace
To be supplied, a unit must be able to trace a line of supply no more 
than two hexes, unblocked by enemy hexes, to a supplied road. A supplied road 
is one that can trace a line of road hexes off a friendly map edge, unblocked 
by enemy hexes. The ferry hex-side is considered a road hexside for the 
Germans during the supply trace. Allied units must trace a line of supply off 
the roads in hexes 29,31 or 27,31. German units may use any other road 
leading off the map to trace supply. An enemy hex is one that either contains 
an enemy unit or one that was last entered by an enemy unit. An airborne unit 
supplied by the ground trace is considered to be linked up with the 30th 
Corps. Players do not need to concern them-selves with the actual trace. The 
computer does it for all units. Note that enemy zones of control (hexes next 
to enemy units) do not block the supply trace.
5.2 Airborne Supply Trace
During the Supply Phase, each airborne unit is determined to be in 
airborne supply if within eight hexes of its formation's supply source. This 
trace may be through any type of terrain or even enemy units. Airborne units 
linked with 30th Corps do not participate in the airborne supply trace. The 
historicaI suppIy source hexes are listed below. The Allied player chooses 
his own source hexes for the FREE SET-UP option.
FORMATIONSUPPLY SOURCE HEX
1st BR AB 3,7
101st US AB15,26
82nd US AB16,9
POL AB 8,7
A supply source that falls in enemy hands ceases to provide airborne 
supply until in friendly control. The Polish suppIy source will change if 
occupied by a German unit when the Polish Brigade actually drops.
ADVANCED GAME ONLY: During the suppIy phase the Allied pIayer will move the 
cursor from each supply source hex and pass it through units to be given 
airborne supply. Units so supplied will be temporarily removed from the map 
(although for all purposes they are considered to still be on the map). Only 
airborne units of that formation will be given supply. The cursor will not 
supply a unit that is further than eight hexesfrom the supply source. The 
cursor may not enter hexes next to enemy units unless occupied by a friendly 
unit, enter hexes with enemy units or cross major river hexsides except at 
bridges. The cursor is prohibited from moving off the map across border 
hexsides. You are allowed to accidentally move next to an enemy unit only 
once. The second time this happens the supply phase for that formation will 
be exited.
5.3 Supply States
A unit is SUPPLIED if it passes the ground supply trace. A unit that 
fails the ground trace, but is supplied by the airborne trace is considered 
OUT OF COMMUNICATIONS. A unit that fails both the ground and airborne traces 
is UNSUPPLIED. An UNSUPPLIED unit that attacks has a 50% chance of becoming 
ISOLATED and a 30% of becoming ISOLATED if defending. It is assumed in such 
cases that the unit has nearly exhausted its ammunition reserves.
5.4 Supply Effects
Units that are OUT OF COMMUNICATIONS have their operation point 
allowance reduced from 20 to I6. UNSUPPLIED units receive 10 operation points 
and have their fire strength reduced by 50% when they fire. ISOLATED units 
receive 5 operation points and have their fire strength reduced by 75%. 
UNSUPPLIED and ISOLATED units lose efficiency each turn.
6.0 REINFORCEMENTS
The computer will automatically enter reinforcements on the map 
according to the Order of Battle Chart at the back of the rulebook.
6.1 Entry Hexes
If the entry hex of a reinforcement unit is enemy occupied or its entry 
would violate stacking, the unit will enter a nearby entry hex unless the 
unit is airborne. Stacking is modified for incoming units in an entry hex 
regardless of normal stacking restrictions. Entry hexes are listed on the 
Order of Battle Chart.
6.2 Delayed Arrival
Each side is allowed only so many units on the map at one time. The 
Allies may have sixty-five and the German sixty-two units. If a reinforcing 
unit wouId vioIate this Iimit then the unit's arrival is delayed that turn. 
The player would have to buildup units, or through combat or disbanding, lose 
a unit in order for the reinforcing unit to appear the next turn. A unit's 
arrival is also delayed if all avallable entry hexes are full (Allies have 
only three) or occupied by enemy units. An enemy controlled supply source hex 
results in reinforcing airborne units being delayed. Airborne units may also 
be delayed due to the weather.
7.0 UNIT BREAKDOWN/BUILDUP PHASE
Units that plotted breakdowns and build-ups during the previous turn 
will now execute that plot if eligible. Disbanding is also executed at this 
time.
7.I Eligibility for Breakdowns and Buildups
Units with buildup plots will search their hex for units of their 
parent organization and will execute the plot if one or more are found. Units 
that contain component battalions or regiments and are plotted to break down 
will do so if the stacking limits or unit limits would not be exceeded. The 
Allies may onIy have sixty-five units on the map and the Germans sixty-two. 
The built-up or broken-down units will assume normal mode. German units off 
map and Allied units on reinforcement hexes will assume travel mode. The 
Order of Battle Chart dispIays all possible buildups and breakdowns.
7.2 Buildup/Breakdown Effects
A built-up parent unit has its strength increased by 15% when attacking 
or defending. Units with a stacking value above one have double the road 
costs when in travel mode.
8.0 OPERATION PHASES
During these phases players expend operation points performing actions 
that include: moving, changing mode, plotting combat. and fortifying.
8.1 Cursor Menu
While in this menu a pIayer may choose the foIIowing functions:
(0-6): 0 centers the screen, and 1-6 moves the cursor in the indicated 
direction.
(G)et:  Accesses the unit(s) in the hex beneath the cursor. You may even 
access enemy units for examination only.
(C)ombat: Exits the Operations Phase and activates combat resolution. 
(T)errain: Removes all unit shapes from the map to expose the terrain 
underneath. Press any key to return units.
ADVANCED GAME ONLY: You may not access enemy units for examination.
8.2  Unit Menu
When the (G)et function is used from the cursor menu and there is more 
than one unit in the hex, a list of the units is displayed. numbered from one 
to two, three, or four. Pressing a number will access that unit while 
pressing (Q)uit will return to the cursor menu.
8.3 Command Menu #1
An accessed unit will have its name and a few of its statistics 
displayed. A directional compass is printed in the comer as an aid for 
movement. From this menu the player may execute any of the actions on the 
command list or access the Command Menu #2 by pressing "D", or the Command 
List by Pressing "L".
8.4 Command Menu #2
Unit's statistics are shown at the bottom of the map. From this menu 
any of the actions on the command list may be executed. The Command Menu #1 
may be accessed by Pressing "D", and the Command List maybe accessed by 
pressing "L". Below is an exampIe of an accessed unit with an explanation of 
its statistics:
GE 9SS HQ DIV  STACK:2
CP:30  FORT:1  EFF:95 DB:N  ART:95(1)S
ORG:N-38  COMMAND:I  ADV:0 ATTACK
CLEAR  OP:2  NORMAL  SUPPLIED
The above HQ unit of the 9SS divIsion has a stacking value of 2, a 
combat strength of 30, a fortification of 1, an efficiency of 95. and is not 
plotted for disbanding. Its artiIlery fire strength is 95 (of which 100% 
wouId be applied as protective fire to the first unit attacked within range). 
The artillery is short ranged which means that the fire strength is halved at 
two hexes. The unit has no breakdown/buildup plot - the German player may add 
up to another 38 units on the map. The unit is in command control. has 
plotted an advance of zero hexes after combat, and has plotted an attack for 
this turn. It is in clear terrain, has 2 remaining operation points, is in 
normal mode, and is supplied.
8.5 Command List
The command list displays all the possible actions the unit may take 
with the required keystroke. Command Menu #1 may be accessed by hitting any 
key and Command Menu #2 by "D". No other commands may be executed from this 
menu
(0-6): Centers and moves unit under the cursor in the indicated direction.
(G)et: Accesses units in the hex.
(N)ext: The next unit on the map in order of appearance is scrolled to and 
accessed.
(Q)uit: Exits unit and enters Cursor Menu.
(T)errain: Removes units from the map.
(X)Disband: Unit is plotted to be removed fromthe map (DB:Y or DB:N is 
displayed). One third of it's remaining combat strength is distributed among 
units in the same hex.
(F)ort: Fortify one level. The number following is the current fort level.
(M)ode: Changes mode. Letter indicates present mode. (T=travel and N=normal)
(B)uildup/Breakdown: Changes plot from N (no action) to D (breakdown) or U 
(buildup). N-38, D-38, or U-38 is displayed. The number equals unit slots 
available.
FOR ADVANCED GAME ONLY:
(A)dvance: Orders unit to advance after combat. The number may range from 0 
to 2 indicating the extent of the desired advance. The program automatically 
determines this in the INTERMEDIATE game.
(O)ffensive Barrage: Allows an artillery unit to plot a barrage. Move cursor 
to target and type "T".
(P)rotective Barrage: Allows an artillery unit to plot its protective fire 
split among attacked units within range (1 = 100% to first unit and 2 = 50% 
for first unit and 50% for the second). The command toggles from Art(1) to 
Art(2) on the display.
8.6 Operation Point Aillowances
Units of both sides receive operation points at the beginning of the 
turn and then again at the beginning of the second operation phase. The 
number of operation points received is dependent upon a unit's supply status. 
SUPPLIED units receive 20 operation points, OUT OF COMMUNICATION units 
receive 16, UNSUPPLIED units receive 10 and ISOLATED units receive 5. The 
first turn is an exception in that airborne units have a random subtracted 
and most German units have zero operation points. German units on turn two 
receive 15 operation points per phase. Unused operation points from the first 
phase are added to the second phase up to a maximum of ten. For example, a 
supplied unit could have 30 operation points to expend in the second phase, 
if only 10 or less points were expended in the first phase. Reinforcing 
airborne units have a random subtracted regardless of the turn. Reinforcing 
units may receive zero operation points the first phase of the turn they 
arrive on, representing the fact that those units arrived later in the day.
8.7 Moving a Unit
To move a unit simply press 1-6, corresponding to the direction you 
wish to move (as indicated by the compass on the display). Pressing "0" will 
center the unit on the screen. The operation point cost of the hex moved into 
will be subtracted from the unit's remaining operation points (see Operation 
Costs Table for complete list of costs). If a unit has insufficient operation 
points to move into a hex it will not move unless the unit hasn't yet moved 
that turn and the hex being moved into is not adjacent to an enemy unit (note 
that this is per turn not per phase). The unit is then moved and its 
operation points is reduced to zero. Every time a unit fails to move into a 
hex it loses a random of one to three operation points.
8.8 Zones of Control, Movement Restrictions and Stacking
The six hexagons surrounding a unit constitute its zone of control 
(ZOC). Units must pay an additional operation point cost to enter or leave an 
enemy ZOC. Units moving in normal mode directly from one enemy ZOC to another 
have their operation points reduced to zero. Bridge building may not be 
conducted in enemy ZOC. Units that must retreat into an enemy ZOC lose extra 
casualties.
Allied units may not move off or attack across the border of the map. 
Allied ZOC do not extend across the border hexsides.
Units may not use road movement costs unless in travel mode. Units 
except for airborne and infantry may only cross a stream, canal, or river in 
travel mode at a bridge. Allied airborne units may cross rivers only with the 
aid of an engineer. Engineers may only transport one airborne unit per 
operation phase. The engineer must be in the same hex as the transporting 
unit or in the hex being moved into. One unit per combat phase may also 
advance (but not retreat) after combat across a river with the same 
restrictions. The engineer unit of the 1st British airborne has no river 
crossing capabilities.
Units have a stacking value of one to four. A parent unit has a 
stacking value egual to the number of units built into it. No more than four 
stacking points may be in a hex at anyone time (except for incoming 
reinforcing units). Units in travel mode pay one more operation point to 
stack with friendly units.
The river hexside between hexes 10,4 and 10,5 is a ferry point that 
maybe used by German units in travel mode at a cost of 10 operation points. 
Only one German unit Per turn may cross the ferry. German units wilI not be 
allowed to retreat or advance after combat across the ferry.
ADVANCED GAME ONLY: Units in travel mode may not stack together (except 
incoming reinforcements).
8.9 Travel Mode and Road Movement
A unit may change from normal to travel mode or from travel to normal 
mode at the cost of operation points (see Operation Costs Table). Units in 
travel mode change automatically to normaI mode when retreated. Travel mode 
units have their modified combat strength reduced by 67%. Artillery units 
will not conduct barrages if in travel mode.
Units may only use road movement costs when in travel mode. Units in 
travel mode may only move into a hex that has a white hexside in common with 
its current hex, That white hexside represents a road connecting the two 
hexes. Travel mode units expend an additional point to stack. When playing 
the ADVANCED game units in travel mode may not stack together.
8.10 Command Control
In the INTERMEDIATE GAME all units are considered to be in command 
control and therefore do not suffer any out-of-command movement costs.
ADVANCED GAME ONLY:Units that begin the turn in the same hex or next to the 
HQ unit of their formation are in command control. Command control of a unit 
is displayed as "I" for in command and "O" for out of command. Units out of 
command may incur an additional zero to three operation point cost when 
moving in normal mode or when executing combat
8.11  Fortifications
A unit may fortify to five levels by expending the operation point cost 
(see Operation Cost Table). Fortification costs more when the unit is next to 
an enemy unit. Presence of an engineer unit decreases fortification costs. 
When a unit moves, it's fortification level returns to zero. A unit's chances 
of retreating are decreased when fortified. A unit's losses are reduced by 5% 
per fort level.
8.12  Bridge Building and Blowing
When an Allied unit first attempts to cross certain bridges there is 
about a 30% chance that the bridge will blow. Levels of difficulty modify 
this percentage. A bridge is checked only once per game. It either blows then 
or never blows. An Allied engineer unit that finds itself next to a blown 
bridge site at the beginning of its operation phase will automatically 
re-buiId it at the cost of 20 operation points. There are five bridges that 
will never be blown on the map. They are indicated on the laminated map card.
ADVANCED GAME ONLY: An Allied engineerunit must be in normal mode to be 
eligible to build a bridge.
8.13 Artillery
Headquarter and artillery units contain artillery fire strength that 
maybe applied to offensive and protective fire barrages. This fire is 
automatically applied to the target unit, provided the artillery unit is 
within range, is not in travel mode, hasn;t plotted normal combat, and hasn't 
fired that phase. Some units have artillery fire that is limited to one hex. 
and some have their fire strength halved at two hexes. The units that fire at 
normal strength at two hexes have an "L" following their displayed fire 
strength. Those halved at two hexes have an "S", and those with the one hex 
range have a "D". Some units will receive additional artillery fire strength 
points as reinforcements if in ground or airborne supply according to the 
chart below:
UNIT    TURNFIREPOINTS
-------------------------------
HQ/101380
HQ/101580
HQ/1335
HQ/59488
ADVANCED GAME ONLY: In the advanced game, players actually plot the target 
hex of the offensive barrage. Move the cursor to the desired hex and press 
"T". Protective fire is plotted to hit the first attack withinrange or the 
first two attacks (at 50% strength each), depending on the plot. The plot is 
toggled between Art(1) and Art(2) by pressing "P".
8.14 Engineers
Allied engineers have several important functions. They build bridges, 
facilitate fortification, transport airborne units across rivers, and give a 
combat bonus. See the appropriate sections for details.
8.15 Plotting Cobat
Both the defender and attacker expend operation points in combat just 
before combat is resolved. A unit that attempts to move onto an enemy unit 
will plot combat against that hex. A unit with insufficient operation points 
will fail to attack when combat is resolved. The direction that the unit 
attacked will now be displayed in Command Menu #1 whenever the unit is 
accessed. The notation "ATTACK" will also appear in the unit Menu. Combat 
plots may not be rescinded.
Battles are resolved in the order that they are initiated. In addition. 
the order that individual units are plotted to attack the same defender 
affects their impact on the battle. The first unit to plot the attack incurs 
no modification to its combat strength. The second unit attacks at 80% of 
strength, the third at 60%, and any unit thereafter at 40% of strength. 
Losses allocated to attacking units are also affected by the order of attack.
8.16 Plotting Advances After Combat
In the INTERMEDIATE GAME, advances after combat are automatically 
handled by the computer. The computer equally divides the available attacking 
units to advance among the attacking hexes, vacated hexes, and hexes in the 
path of retreat. The units who attacked the hex first will be the ones to 
advance the furthest.
ADVANCED GAME ONLY: Players plot the number of hexes (0 to 2) to advance 
after combat for each unit. The advance will follow the path of retreat of 
enemy units.
9.O COMBAT
When the Combat Phase is initiated, each combat plotted by the player 
is resolved in order of the actual plotting. For each battle, artillery 
protective fire on attacking units is resolved first followed by offensive 
barrages on defending units. Defensive fire is then conducted against 
attacking units, followed by offensive fire by attacking units. Retreats and 
advances are then executed. Odds, losses, and retreat results are dispIayed 
on the screen. In addition, the approximate unmodified combat strength and 
hex location of the defender are also displayed.
9.1 Efficiency
Each unit has an efficiency that ranges from 40% to 100%. A unit's 
combat strength is directly modified by its efficiency (a combat strength of 
50 with 90% efficiency would have a modified strength of 45). Efficiency 
represents fatigue and disruption incurred by a unit from movement and 
combat. A unit loses efficiency for every hex it moves into (except when in 
travel mode). A unit loses efficiency in battle according to its losses. 
Attacking units will lose more efficiency than defending units on a per loss 
basis. Isolated and unsupplied units lose efficiency at the beginning of each 
turn.
Units in supply regain some efficiency at the beginning of each turn. 
Any unused operation points from the previous movement phase recover 
efficiency on a point for point basis at the beginning of the turn.
9.2 Fire Strengtb Modifiers and Bonuses
A unit will start with a fire strength egual to its combat strength. It 
is subsequently modified by a series of factors that include order of attack, 
supply status, unit type, and battle time. Battle time is the amount of 
actual time the unit spent assaulting the position. This is determined by 
checking how many operation points it had remaining before subtracting the 
cost for attacking. A list of such modifiers and bonuses are located on the 
Fire Strength Modifiers and Bonuses chart.
9.3 Casualties
Every ten fire strength points (after modification) applied against a 
target results in a loss of one combat strength point. These losses are 
further modified by a series of factors that include terrain, fortification, 
and unit type. These modifiers are located in the Casualty Modifier chart. 
9.4 Retreats and Advances
Retreats are based on the percent of casualties lost, unit 
efficiencies, fortification leveIs, and a random. Units in cities and units 
without retreat routes will not retreat.
The computer will automatically retreat and advance units. Generally, 
units will retreat toward friendly lines away from the attacking force, 
following roads where possible. Advancing units will follow the retreating 
unit's path. The first unit to plot the attack will advance first if 
eligible. Units will not advance or retreat where normally prohibited in 
regular movement. Units expend operation points when retreating or advancing 
(except ZOC costs). A unit wiIl advance or retreat even if it has 
insufficient operation points.
10.0  VICTORY CONDITIONS
The Allied player gains victory points for controlling and keeping in 
supply objective hexes. They lose points for overrun airborne supply source 
hexes and German controlled town/city hexes. The Allied score is used to 
determine the leveI of victory.
10.1  Victory Points
The Allied unit receives victory points at the end of the game per 
controlled, supplied objective hex, The hexes adjacent to the objective hex 
must also be controlled and in supply in order to receive the victory points 
for the objective hex. The objective hexes and their point values are Iisted 
below:
HEXPOINTS
-------------------
10,425
 8,410
12,920
The Allied player loses three points the instant the 1st airborne's 
supply source is overrun. He loses two points each for the supply hexes of 
the 101st and the 82nd when overrun.
The Allied loses one point per German controlled town/city hex at the 
end of the game.
10.2 Victory Levels
The AIIied score at the end of the game is compared to the chart below 
for the level of vIctory.
SCORELEVEL OF VICTORY
-------------------------------
42 +Allied Strategic
20 to 41Allied Tactical
13 to 19Draw
1 to 12German Tactical
0 and lessGerman Strategic
11.0  STRATEGY AND TACTICS
After playing the game several times, the designers and playtesters 
give the following suggestions:
11.1  ALLied Player
You will find that you have several different pockets of troops that 
need to be linked up. Your paratroopers must open the way for the 30th Corps 
units to roll through to Arnhem and also hold that narrow corridor open to 
supply.
The 1st British airborne division, landing near Arnhem, must move 
quickly to capture the bridge at Arnhem. It must also protect it's source of 
supply whiihc is unfortunately far away from the bridge. The mounting German 
resistance will make this a challenge.
The American 82nd airborne, landing near Nijmegen, must capture the 
bridges near Grave and Nijmegen and at the same time defend their suppIy 
source, which from the outset may be under attack. The bridge at Nijmegen is 
crucial to the whole operation and will be difficult to capture.
The Arnerican 101st airborne, landing near Best, must clear the bridges 
at Veghel, Best, and Zon. Taking Eindhoven and the bridge there is essential 
to breaking the way open to the 30th Corps. German forces will threaten your 
lines of communications from the east and the west.
The 30th Corps has the challenge of piercing the German line as quickly 
as possible and drive up the highway to Arnhem. Its narrow avenue of assault 
and stiff resistance will invariably slow it down. Good weather and well 
placed air strikes should ease the way to relieve the waiting paratroopers.
11.2 German Player
Your forces outside Amhem are strong enough to isolate and batter down 
the British 1st airborne division. It would be wise to send units of the 10SS 
division across the ferry to reinforce your token forces at the Nijmegen 
bridge. The gathering forces at Kleve should march on the 82nd airborne's 
supply source. The 107 Panzer formation coming in from the east should move 
across the map and cut the highway at Zon, Vegal or Uden. The units arriving 
at Best should dig in and threaten the highway. The units in front of the 
30th Corps advance should delay until the last man. As you can see the German 
player has an assortment of side actions to be fought all with the single 
purpose of slowing down and haIting the Allied advance along that highway 
leading into the heartland of Germany.
An alternate strategy to the above would be to send all available units 
to the Arnhem area to contest Allied advances across the Rhine river.
11.3 Tactical Hints
1. When making a determined assault, buildup your units and attack with your 
strongest unit first. Take special note that armor is significantly reduced 
when firing into rough and forest hexes. It maybe better to attack with an 
infantry unit.
2. Be aware of the potential hitting power of air strikes, especially those 
delivered by the Allies. Air interdiction is an effective way of slowing down 
German forces on the second and third days.
3. As the Allies, be sure to breakdown most of your airborne units to 
battalions, enter travel mode, and check out allbridges in the area. Start 
early in establishing a protective corridor centered on the highway to 
Arnhem.
4. Allies should keep engineer units at the front of the 30th Corps advance, 
placing them at bridge sites.
5. HQ units are valuable in that most contain a powerful artillery contingent 
and provide command control.
6. Keep in mind the variety of tasks that engineers perform: bridge building, 
aiding fortification construction, combat bonus, and river crossings.
7. Be aware ofthe movement bonuses and restrictions of units in travel mode. 
Most units can cross a river or stream only at a bridge in travel mode.
8. Take note that units in cities are never forced to retreat. They fight to 
the bitter end.
9. As the Allies, be very protective of your airborne supply sources, losing 
a supply source will effectively neutralize that division as a fighting 
force.
10. Take note that the Allied airborne forces are the only units able to 
transport across rivers with the aid of engineers. This makes then invaluable 
in the last half of the game when the Rhine river line must be breached.
12.0 HISTORICAL COMMENTARY
On September 10, 1944 Field MarshaI Montgomery proposed an ambitious 
plan that involved a massive combined airborne and armored assault to get 
across the Rhine nver and strike at the industrial center of Germany in the 
Ruhr valley. The plan encompassed the dropping of more than three airborne 
divisions and the front line break-out of a full armored corps. The airborne 
divisions would secure the highway and bridges between the front lines and 
the city of Arnhem, the back door to the Ruhr valley. The armored corps would 
roll up the highway and over the bridges into the heart of industrial 
Germany. An astute observation by GeneraI Browning, overall commander of the 
airborne units, that they might be going a bridge too far proved all too 
prophetic.
September 17, saw a near perfect dropping of the three airborne 
divisions. With good weather and air superiority. the Allies enjoyed minimal 
scattering and casualties.
The 1st British airborne division landed about seven mileswest of the 
Arnhem bridge. The jeep recon unit, along with three battalions of 
paratroopers, moved quickly toward the bridge. Two of the battalions and the 
recon unit were stopped by an SS Training battalion between them and the 
bridge. The other battalion slipped by along the river and took the northern 
approaches to the bridge at Arnhem, but were prevented from capturing the 
southern end by a German unit.
The American 82nd division got off to a good start by taking the bridge 
at Grave and clearing the area around Groesbeek. Although a crossing was 
taken over the Mass-Waal Canal, the all important bridge at Nijmegen was  
left in  German  hands.
The American 101st Airborne division took the bridge at Veghel, but had 
the bridge at Zon blown up in their faces. Movement toward capturing the 
bridge at Best resulted in a heavy contest with German units in the area.
The 30th Corps was nearly stopped dead in its tracks by unexpected 
resistance, covering only half the distance to Eindhoven by the end of the 
first day despite massive air strikes and artillery barrages.
On the second day, September 18, the weather was cloudy, interfering 
with the planned airlifts. The 1st airborne continued its struggle to reach 
the Arnhem bridge in force. The lone and isolated battalion at the bridge 
gallantly fought off German attacks. German units from the 9th SS division 
and independent units from the west steadily squeezed the airborne units out 
of their initial drop and supply zones. Communication problems prevented the 
higher command in Britain from knowing what was going on.
The 82nd captured another bridge across the Maas-Waal Canal, but 
attempts to clear the southern approaches of the bridge at Nijmegen failed. 
The 82nd was also involved in heavy fighting to protect its suppIy drop 
zones.
The 101st fought its way to the bridge at Best, only to have it 
destroyed. Units of the 30th Corps reached the blown bridges site at Zon at 
the end of the day.
On the third day, weather prevented the Poles and airborne 
reinforcements from making air drops. The British battalion at the Arnhem 
bridge still hung on. The tanks of the 30th Corps roIIed across the 
constructed bridge at Zon and reached Nijmegen by noon. Determined attacks by 
the 82nd and the 30th Corps failed to dislodge the Germans at the Nijmegen 
bridge.The 101st aided by armor from the 30th Corps pushed the Germans out of 
Best. The 107th Panzer Brigade, striking out from the east nearly captured 
Zon before being stopped.
On the fourth day, the 1st airborne was forced to retreat into the 
Osterbeek area, abandoning their supply drop zones. The Poles were again 
prevented from dropping due to bad weather. The Germans recaptured the Arnhem 
bridge in the ate afternoon, but were unable to clear the wreckage until the 
next day. Also in the afternoon a battalion of the 82nd, aided by 30th Corps 
engineers, amphibiously assaulted across the Waal River. British tanks forced 
their way across the Nijmegen bridge which failed to blow, linking up with 
the airborne battalion by the end of the day.
On the fifth day the weather cleared, allowing the Poles to drop near 
Driel. The British tanks ofthe 30th Corps were stopped about six miles from 
Arnhem on the narrow raised  highway from Nijmegen.
The sixth day saw the 1st airborne dwindling in strength and supplies. 
Units 8f the 30th Corps grappled with German units between Nijmegen and 
Arnhem with littIe progress made other than relieving the PoIes at Driel. 
German units cut the highway just north of VegheI, forcing units from the 
30th Corps to go back and cIear the corridor, aided by the 101st. The German 
operation seriously interrupted the flow of suppIies to the north. The Allied 
advance was essentially ground to a stop. In the next few days what little 
remained of the 1st Airborne was evacuated across the river.
At a tremendous cost the Allies had a fifty mile corridor going 
nowhere. Arnhem was in German hands and would remain so until April of 1945.
