DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR
Strategic Studies Group (SSG)
CONSTRUCTION KIT MANUAL

1. INTRODUCTION
The  following  notes  are  meant as a  guide  to  WarPlan.  The
information they contain will also provide some insights into how
the  game  works, and should be read at some stage  even  if  you
never construct your own scenarios.
Varying  an existing scenario is fairly straight-forward and  the
easiest  way  to  get  the most out of  your  game.  All  of  the
scenarios in the game come with suggested variations which can be
easily implemented. However, designing an original scenario  will
require a reasonable degree of familiarity with the game itself.
We  publish  complete  scenarios for the  Decisive  Battles  Game
System  in  our  magazine Run 5. The magazine  contains  all  the
information required to create entirely new games using  WarPlan
and  WarPaint.  For details on Run 5 magazine,  please  contact
Strategic Studies Group (SSG).

2. USING THE DESIGN MENUS
The  data card contains a schematic display of the design  menus.
They  operate  in the same way as the Game Menus  that  you  have
already used.
You  cannot  make changes to the historical scenarios themselves;
rather you must save the scenario onto a save game disk and  then
edit   the  data.  This  is  to  prevent  you  from  accidentally
corrupting the historical scenarios. Nor can you edit a  game  in
progress. Only scenarios with a game turn number of zero  may  be
edited.

3. PREPARING A DISK
Whether  making a variation to an historical scenario or creating
an  original  scenario, the procedure for preparing a  save  game
disk is essentially the same. Examine the Start and Design menus.
If  you  have  not formatted a Decisive Battles save  game  disk,
prepare  one using the procedure given in Chapter 3 of  the  Game
Routines.
When  making  a  change  to an historical  scenario,  select  the
<CREATE> line from Menu A and type (RET) to obtain Menu B.
If  the  template which is providing the source for the variation
is on a scenario disk, select the <SCENARIO> line and type (RET).
Select  the  chosen  scenario from  Menu  C.  The  computer  will
automatically process you through to Menu J (Create Master).
If  the  template which is providing the source for the variation
is  on  a save game disk, select the <DISK> line and type  (RET).
Load   the   chosen  file  from  Menu  D.   The   computer   will
automatically process you through to Menu J (Create Master).
Use  WarPlan and WarPaint to make whatever changes you wish  to
the data and then come back to Menu J.
Select  the <DISK> line to go to Menu D. Select the <SAVE>  line.
Locate  the desired save location in the catalog with  the  arrow
keys  and then type (RET). You will be offered an opportunity  to
enter  a comment. Use it if you wish, otherwise select the  <SAVE
GAME> line and type (RET).
IBM  users can store scenario and save games in the same catalog.
Thus, there is no Menu D in the IBM routines.
When  you  wish to create an original scenario, repeat the  above
procedure but before entering data use the <CLEAR> line in Menu J
to erase the data bases.

4. THE WARPLAN DESIGN MENUS
This  section  describes the various menus in  WarPlan  together
with explanations of their functions. The order in which they are
presented represents a convenient sequence for the creation of  a
new  scenario. Once you completed your new scenario,  we  suggest
you  run it through in <OBSERVE> mode several times to fine  tune
the  game balance. To assist with this process, type Cntl (F)  at
any time to enter the fast resolution mode.
(a). MAP DATA (Menu 5)
(i). Map Size/Info (Menu 6)
The map size in Decisive Battles is variable. Each map element is
9  hexes  wide by 9 hexes deep. There may be up to three elements
across and three down. Thus, the maximum size of a battlefield is
27  by 27 hexes. At a suggested ground scale of 300-500 yards per
hex,  this represents an area somewhere between 20 and 60  square
miles.
In  creating  a  scenario, map size must be set  before  anything
else.  Select the smallest map size that can comfortably  support
the  action  you wish to represent. Apart from being  less  work,
smaller maps will mean faster games.
The  top  left sector should always be set to 0. Set  the  bottom
right sector variable to the appropriate value. To make a 9  x  9
grid  (i.e. a 1 sector map), set the bottom right sector variable
to 0!
IBM  users can choose colours for river, coast-line and  map-edge
hex-sides. Road and cursor colours are also selectable.
(ii). Define Terrain (Menu 7)
There  are  thirty-two (32) terrain shapes in  Decisive  Battles.
Each shape can be completely redrawn using our powerful WarPaint
graphics  editor.  The names and sighting,  movement,  cover  and
fortification effects of each terrain type are defined  here.  It
is possible to represent the ground conditions of any battlefield
by  judicious  use  of names and effects. Use the  (RET)  key  to
advance the cursor through the screen.
Examine  any (or all) of the game scenarios and the blank  design
form in Appendix A.
For  each  terrain shape you wish to use, enter a 1-11  character
name.
The  sighting  value represents the ease of visibility  into  and
through  the  hex.  A  value  of 0 specifies  that  there  is  no
impediment to visibility; i.e. the hex is easy to see through.  A
value  of  15  specifies  that the line of  sight  is  completely
blocked. Values of 8-15 will create super dense terrain  and  may
result in adjacent units being unable to see each other.
The  movement  value of a hex specifies how many movement  points
each  unit  must  expend  when traversing  it.  Units  in  column
formation  will pay only 1 MP when using visible roads no  matter
what  terrain type is underneath. Hidden roads do not affect  the
movement value of a hex. Note that terrain types with an MP value
of 0 prohibit entry for any unit.
The terrain symbol along the top of the screen corresponds to the
line currently being edited by the cursor.
The  cover  value  of  a  hex  measures  the  extent  of  natural
protection  from enemy attack provided by the terrain type.  This
does  not include any man-made structures. A value of 0 specifies
that there is little or no protection afforded to units occupying
the  hex. A value of 7 indicates tremendous protection. Note that
brigades defending hexes with high natural cover values may  have
more  difficulty  in bringing fire to bear on the  enemy  than  a
brigade  in  more  open terrain. Assaults launched  from  heavily
covered  hexes are less effective than assaults from open ground.
There  is a balance to be struck . Brigades assaulting from  open
terrain  will suffer more severely than brigades assaulting  from
heavily covered terrain.
The  fortification  value measures the extent of  man-made  rifle
pits,  breastworks and basic field defences in a given hex  type.
We  have  allowed  the use of 31 hex types to  ensure  there  are
enough  to  construct  detailed field  defences.  A  value  of  7
specifies the extensive development of field defences. A value of
0  specifies none. A separate entry should be used for North  and
South fortifications.
By  examining  the terrain data bases in each of  the  historical
scenarios, you can quickly see how to implement these  values  in
your  own designs. Field defence construction became an ever more
important battlefield tactic to both sides as the war progressed.
The  Confederacy,  particularly, excelled in the  preparation  of
complex and deadly entrenchments.
In many instances, you will note several hex shapes with the same
name  and  effect values. The large number of hex types available
has  allowed us to customise terrain features to produce  a  more
aesthetically pleasing battlefield.
(iii). Map Create Utility (Menu 8)
It's  probably  a  good  idea to make a  draft  version  of  your
battlefield before completing the rest of the map data.  However,
we  strongly advise you not to edit the map screen until all  the
information  in Menus 6 and 7 has been compiled and entered  into
the  program. IBM users should read the note at the end  of  this
section.
A  9 x 9 hex section of the map will appear with a white, hollow,
flashing cursor. In the top right of the screen you will find the
hex  co-ordinate of the cursor's current location. In the  bottom
right  of  the  screen you will see the terrain  name,  the  icon
corresponding to the name, the relative position of the cursor in
relation to the whole map and the icon identifying the side which
controls  the hex.  If the hex has been defined as an  objective,
the name appears immediately above the terrain name.
There  are  32 terrain types which can be entered. River,  bridge
and ford hex-sides can be entered. Roads can be added to a hex  .
Every hex must be identified as North or South controlled.
The  I,J,K,M  and  1-6  keys  will move  the  cursor  around  the
battlefield. Type (0) centre the screen on the cursor.
IBM  users can use the f1 - f9 function keys to select sequential
9x9  sectors of the map; i.e. f1 selects the top left sector,  f9
selects the bottom right sector.
To create a terrain type in a hex, type (T)(n) where n = a number
between  0 and 31. Please see the blank terrain effects chart  in
Appendix A. Note that terrain types T1-T3 require you to type (T)
(n)  (SPACE).  This  is  to distinguish them  from  double  digit
terrain types which use 1-3 as the first number. Terrain types T0
and T1(SPACE) are water hexes. T0 cannot be entered by any units.
T1(SPACE)  can be entered by all units and is therefore  suitable
as  a  bridge, ferry, ford or pontoon link across a wide body  of
water.  Terrain types T2(SPACE)-T31 can be entered  by  all  unit
types  and it is these types which make up the land component  of
the battlefield.
The road structure needs some explanation. There are two types of
roads; functional roads and cosmetic roads. Functional roads  are
those used by the movement routines to march columns of men  long
distances. Cosmetic roads are those which end in dead  ends,  the
map  edge  or  anywhere which could confuse the computer.  Use  a
cosmetic road if you don't want the computer to treat the hex  as
a road when moving troops in column or determining march routes.
Units using either type of road pay 1 MP per road hex entered. To
add a functional road to a hex, type (R) while the cursor is over
the  hex.  Type (R) again to remove the road. To add  a  cosmetic
road  to  a hex, type (C) while the cursor is over the hex.  Type
(C) again to remove the cosmetic road.
Functional roads are one of two types; normal or hidden. Type (R)
(X)  to  specify a hidden road. The road icon is  masked  by  the
terrain  icon and any units using the road will pay the  movement
value of the terrain in the hex.
The movement routines will nonetheless use hidden roads as though
they  were normal roads when determining march routes and  column
movement.  This  technique is suited  for  picking  out  a  track
through  dense terrain where placing a normal road  would  confer
too great an advantage on the user. Type (X) again to convert the
hidden road back to a normal road.
To  create a river hex-side, you must type three keys. The  first
is  (S).  This  identifies a hex-side. The  second  is  a  number
between 1 and 3. This identifies north, north-eastern and  south-
eastern  hex-sides respectively. Note that the south hex-side  of
one  hex is the north hex-side of the hex directly below  it.  In
this  way, all 6 hex-sides can be edited. The third is  a  number
between 1 and 3. (1) identifies a river. (2) identifies a bridge.
(3) identifies a ford.
Type  (S0)  to clear all hex-sides from a particular hex.  Rivers
cannot  be  crossed except at fords or bridges. The  presence  of
small streams can be accounted for in the terrain types.
Unlike our previous design kits, cities are created by using  the
terrain types; they are not a separate flag.
To set control of a hex to North or South, type (RET) to bring up
the   map  menu  and  select  <SET  NORTH>  or  <SET  SOUTH>   as
appropriate. All hexes, except T0s, will have their terrain  icon
replaced by the North or South control icon. As the cursor moves,
it will leave a trail of the appropriate control icons behind it.
To change control, type (RET) to bring up the map menu and select
<RESET  ALL>.  You  are back at square one  and  can  repeat  the
procedure using the other control icon. When editing hex  control
from scratch, the default value is South.
For  convenience, you can set the cursor to automatically produce
a  terrain shape. With the cursor flashing on the chosen terrain,
type  (RET).  This  brings up the map menu on the  right  of  the
screen.  Selecting  <SET  SHAPE> from this  menu  will  lock  the
current terrain shape to the cursor. You may now move the  cursor
and  the  selected shape will be created wherever the  cursor  is
moved.  Type (RET) again to go back to the menu and select <RESET
ALL> to turn off the shape.
We  suggest you keep the map size as small as possible  for  your
first original scenario.
All maps are compromises between the actuality of the terrain and
its  representation.  Do  not feel afraid  to  be  creative  with
terrain to make the map work properly within the game system.
Important Note for IBM Users. If your IBM supports an EGA or  VGA
card  and you have a colour monitor, you will be able to use  our
"full-map" graphics. There are a few changes you need to be aware
of  when you are building a new map. There are up to 250 full map
icons  which  can be used to create the map. However,  there  are
still  only 32 different terrain types. In other words,  the  new
graphics are purely an overlay covering the basic terrain shapes.
What  you  must do is first create a map using the basic graphics
(i.e.  go  to DOS and re-enter the program, disabling the  "full-
map"  graphics). For example, the Decisive Battles Vol I game  is
usually  started with the command db1. To start  up  without  the
"full map" graphics, use the command db1 f.
Build  up the map using the standard graphics and save as normal.
Return  to DOS and restart with the "full-map" graphics  enabled.
You  can  now go to the WarPaint routines and prepare brilliant,
16 colour terrain shapes and unit icons.
These  icons  are  stored  in a .lbm file  and  are  DPAINT2  (c
Electronic Arts) compatible. Note that when you place these full-
map  hexes  on the map, the original terrain type and  name  will
remain in the lower right of the screen.
Finally.  Issue  14 of our Run 5 magazine contains  an  extensive
article on the use of "full map" graphics.

(b). UNIT DATA (Menu 9)
(i). Limits (Menu 10)
The  limits  menu  is  used to divide the available  unit  blanks
between  the North and South. Select <FORCES> and by  typing  the
(RET)  key repeatedly you will see there are three values  to  be
entered.
There  are a maximum of 15 Corps which may be created.  When  you
type  a  number  into  the <CORPS> line you  are  allocating  the
available  Corps  between  the North  and  South.  The  South  is
allocated  a  number  of Corps equal to 1 less  than  the  number
entered. For example, if you type (8) the South will be allowed a
maximum  of 7 Corps. This number appears in the <max>  column  of
the Southern Corps line.
The procedure for allocating divisions and brigades is identical.
For  example, a value of 19 in the division line would mean  that
the Rebs could use a maximum of 18 divisions, the Union 21.
We have chosen this way of unit allocation so that we can produce
the largest possible force pool in the smallest amount of memory.
Note  that  the value range displayed to the left  of  the  North
forces shows the current, legitimate range for each entry.
(ii). Weapons (Menu 13)
Examine  the blank weapons roster in Appendix A. If the  scenario
you  are  preparing is set in the American Civil  War,  then  the
weapons roster used in all of the historical scenarios should  be
more than adequate. Otherwise, you will have to make your own.
There  are  31 possible weapon types you may use. These  must  be
divided  between artillery types and small arms types.  You  will
have already used Menu 10 (Define Limits) to select the number of
each type you require.
Artillery
To create an artillery type, complete the following steps.
I.D. Enter a 1-11 character name to identify the artillery type.
RANGE.  Enter  a  value between 0 and 5. This  is  the  effective
range, measured in hexes, of the artillery type. For example,  in
a  scenario  where  the  ground scale is  500  yards/hex,  a  6pd
smoothbore would have an effective range of 2 hexes.
RATE  OF FIRE. Enter a value between 0 and 7. This value measures
the reliability, ease of use and rate of fire of a gun.
EFFECTIVENESS. Enter a value between 0 and 7. This value measures
the performance of the gun at close range; i.e. the effectiveness
of its fire into an adjacent hex.
PENETRATION.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This value  measures
the fall-off in performance as the range of the gun increases.  A
value  of 0 means that the gun has little effect beyond the first
hex.  A  value  of  7  means that the gun  retains  much  of  its
effectiveness at its maximum range.
Small Arms
To create a small arms type, complete the following steps.
I.D. Enter a 1-11 character name to identify the small arms type.
RANGE.  Enter a value of 0 or 1. A value of 0 indicates that  the
small  arms  type  is  primarily for melee  use.  A  value  of  1
indicates  that  the  small arms type is primarily  a  projectile
weapon.  Troops  armed  with both melee  and  projectile  weapons
should be assigned a value corresponding to their primary type.
FIRE  EFFECT.  Enter a value between 0 and 7.  This  value  is  a
quantitative  measure of the firepower  delivered  by  the  small
arms type.
MELEE  EFFECT.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This  value  is  a
quantitative measure of the melee performance of the  small  arms
type.
For  example, Civil War cavalrymen used firearms for  skirmishing
but  switched  to  sabres on the occasion of a charge.  The  fire
effect of the pistol should be 1 or 2 while the melee effect of a
sabre  in  the hands of a mounted cavalryman should be  5  or  6.
However,  Civil War cavalrymen were not primarily employed  in  a
charging role so the range should be set at 1.
(iii). Forces (Menus 11)
Examine  the  blank force rosters in Appendix  A.  One  of  these
should be prepared for each formation in the game. Do not attempt
to edit the screen until these rosters have been completed.
The  most  important thing to note about troop  creation  in  the
Decisive  Battles System is that there is no fixed organisational
structure. For example, brigades may be attached to divisions, or
corps, or even directly to the Army HQ. Such a flexible structure
is  the  best way to reflect the operational employment of troops
in the nineteenth century.
Army HQs
COMMANDER. Enter a 1-11 character name to identify the  commander
of the Army.
SECOND IC. Enter a 1-11 character name to identify the second  in
command  of the Army. This variable should only be used  where  a
second in command was officially appointed such as Beauregard  at
Shiloh.  A  2IC  will  reduce the adverse  effects  of  a  C-in-C
casualty.
HQ  I.D.  Enter one or two 1-11 character names to  identify  the
Army.
LOCATION. Enter the x, y map co-ordinates of the Army HQ's  start
or arrival hex.
ARRIVAL.  Enter a number between 0 and 95. This is the turn  that
the  Army HQ will arrive on the map. An arrival number of 0 means
the  HQ begins the game deployed on the map. A human player  will
have  no  control over his subordinates until the Army HQ appears
on the map.
OFFENCE  #1.  Enter  a  value between 0 and  23.  A  value  of  0
specifies  that there is no offensive objective; any other  value
identifies the chosen objective. Only enemy controlled objectives
should be chosen.
OFFENCE  #2. Enter a value between 0 and 23. As above. A computer
Army commander will attempt to capture the first objective before
moving on to the second objective.
DEFENCE  #1.  Enter  a  value between 0 and  23.  A  value  of  0
specifies  that there is no defensive objective; any other  value
identifies  the chosen objective. Friendly controlled  objectives
must be chosen.
DEFENCE  #2. Enter a value between 0 and 23. As above. A computer
Army commander will defend both objectives, giving preference, if
necessary, to the first defensive objective.
HQ  MOVEMENT. Enter a value between 0 and 15. It is the number of
movement points the Army HQ has available each turn to move  over
the  map. The value should reflect the vigour shown by the Army's
commander throughout the battle. The value should also be related
to  the  movement allowances of other troops and to  the  terrain
effects.  In  general, an Army HQ should have a  higher  movement
allowance than a Corps HQ.
STAFF.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This value is a subjective
evaluation of the amount of preparation the Army HQ has done  for
the  battle.  Factors  which  are included  in  this  rating  are
battlefield  familiarity  (recon),  extent  and  detail  of   the
briefings given to subordinates, staff experience and the overall
confidence of the army in its commander.
STRENGTH.  Enter  a  value between 0 and  7.  This  value  simply
describes the size of the provost guard accompanying the Army HQ.
The units are 100s of men. It is not suitable for offensive use.
LEADERSHIP.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This  value  is  only
used  when  the computer is placed in command of an  Army.  Human
commanders must rely upon their own judgement and intuition  when
issuing  orders  to subordinates. You can expect a  much  tougher
battle from a commander with a high leadership value than from  a
lowly rated duffer.
Corps HQs
ARMY  HQ  I.D. Enter 1-9 character name to identify the Corps  or
its commander.
LOCATION. Enter the x, y map co-ordinates of the Corps HQ's start
or arrival hex.
CORPS  TYPE.  Enter a value of 0 or 1. A value of 0 specifies  an
infantry corps; a value of 1 specifies a cavalry corps.
ARRIVAL.  Enter a number between 0 and 95. This is the turn  that
the Corps HQ will arrive on the map. An arrival number of 0 means
the  HQ begins the game deployed on the map. You will not be able
to issue commands to the subordinates of a particular corps until
that corps' HQ has entered the map. Brigades belonging to a Corps
not yet on the map may be directed by the Army commander provided
they are within the four hex immediate command range.
ORDERS.  Enter  a  number between 0 and 2. 0  =  offensive,  1  =
defensive, 2 = reserve. A Corps formation must have an  offensive
order  to move on an enemy controlled objective or to issue  such
an  objective to a division HQ under its control. A Corps with an
offensive order may select two objectives, the first defines  the
route of march to the final destination.
A  Corps with a defensive order may move, or issue such an  order
to  a  subordinate  division HQ, only to  a  friendly  controlled
objective.  Only one objective can be given to  a  corps  with  a
defensive order. A Corps with a reserve order will hold in place,
awaiting  further orders. A Corps with a reserve order  will  not
pay  any  attention to an objective. Note that the Army commander
can  change  these orders as soon as the Corps  HQ  comes  within
communication range. The primary function of these orders  is  to
make  sure that newly arriving troops do not mill about aimlessly
but move sensibly into battle.
OBJECTIVE  #1.  Enter a value between 0 and 23.   A  value  of  0
specifies  no objective; any other value identifies a  particular
objective. The previous paragraph describes their purpose.
OBJECTIVE #2. Enter a value between 0 and 23.  As above.
HQ  MOVEMENT. Enter a value between 0 and 15. It is the number of
movement points the Corps HQ has available each turn to move over
the  map. The value should reflect the vigour shown by the Corps'
commander throughout the battle. The value should also be related
to  the  movement allowances of other troops and to  the  terrain
effects.  In  general,  Corps  HQs  should  have  more  MPs  than
subordinate brigades of the same type.
DAILY  COMMITMENT.  This  value is used  only  by  computer  army
commanders. For any particular day of a battle, a corps commander
can  be  specified as being completely out of communication.  The
army  commander  will not be able to issue orders  to  the  corps
commander.  An  example  of where this feature  is  used  is  the
Chattanooga scenario. Thomas, one of Grant's corps commanders, is
a  very capable officer. However, on the first day of the battle,
Grant  wanted  Thomas to remain on the defensive while  Sherman's
and  Hooker's troops moved into position. For a human  commander,
implementing this plan is no problem. For the computer, it's  not
so  easy. The Union is on the offensive on the first day and thus
the  first time a computer controlled Grant gets in contact  with
Thomas,  he  will be given an offensive command.  By  using  this
value  to put Thomas out of communication with Grant on the first
day  of  the battle, the computer can properly implement  Grant's
historical plan. Enter 0 if this feature is not to be used by the
corps.  Enter 1 if the corps is to be isolated on the  first  day
only,  enter 2 if the corps is to be isolated on the  second  day
only,  enter  3 if the corps is to be isolated on the  first  and
second  days only, enter 4 if the corps is to be isolated on  the
third  day  only, enter 5 if the corps is to be isolated  on  the
first and third days only... etc; i.e day 1 =1, day 2 = 2, day  3
=  4  and day 4 = 8. If the corps is to be isolated for more than
one day, add the value for those days together.
LEADERSHIP.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This  value  measures
the   experience,  confidence  and  determination  of  the  Corps
commander. It is especially important when the Corps HQ is not in
communication  with  its  Army  HQ  and  must  rely  on  its  own
initiative to get things moving.
STAFF.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This value is a subjective
evaluation  of  the amount of preparation the Corps  HQ  and  its
commander have done for the battle. Factors which are included in
this  rating  are  battlefield familiarity  (recon),  extent  and
detail  of  the briefings given to subordinates, staff experience
and  the overall confidence of the corps in its commander.  These
are the same criteria used to rate the Army staff values.
STRENGTH.  Enter  a  value between 0 and  7.  This  value  simply
describes  the size of the provost guard accompanying  the  Corps
HQ.  The  units are 100s of men. It is not suitable for offensive
use.
LIKELIHOOD.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This  value  measures
the  likelihood of a Corps HQ appearing on its start  or  arrival
hex  at the scheduled time. A value of 7 means that the Corps  HQ
is  certain to arrive. HQs or brigades on the same side with  the
same  likelihood  value will be delayed by  the  same  number  of
turns. Units with values of 4 or less may not arrive at all.

Division HQs
DIVISION  HQ  I.D.  Enter  1-9 character  name  to  identify  the
Division or its commander.
CORPS.  Enter a number between 0 and 15. This number defines  the
place  the division will occupy in the order of battle. An  entry
of  0  places the division directly under the command of the Army
HQ. An entry of 1-15 places the division under the command of the
Corps HQ identified by that number.
DIVISION   TYPE. Enter a value of 0 or 1. A value of 0  specifies
an  infantry division; a value of 1 specifies a cavalry division.
Mounted  infantry  divisions should  be  classified  as  infantry
divisions  for  this  purpose. You  should  not  place  artillery
brigades  in  divisions but rather attach them to Corps  or  Army
HQs. Division artillery should be distributed among the component
brigades.
ORDERS.  Enter  a  number between 0 and 2. 0  =  offensive,  1  =
defensive,  2 = reserve. A division must have an offensive  order
to  move  on  an enemy controlled objective. A division  with  an
offensive order may select two objectives, the first defines  the
route  of  march  to  the final destination. A  division  with  a
defensive order may move only to a friendly controlled objective.
Only  one  objective can be given to a division with a  defensive
order.  A  division  with a reserve order  will  hold  in  place,
awaiting further orders. A division with a reserve order will not
pay  any attention to an objective. Note that the Army commander,
or  the  Corps commander, can change these orders as soon as  the
division  comes within communication range. The primary  function
of these orders is to make sure that newly arriving troops do not
mill about aimlessly but move sensibly into battle.
OBJECTIVE  #1.  Enter a value between 0 and 23.   A  value  of  0
specifies  no objective; any other value identifies a  particular
objective. The previous paragraph describes their purpose.
OBJECTIVE #2. Enter a value between 0 and 23.  As above.
LEADERSHIP.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This  value  measures
the  experience,  confidence and determination  of  the  division
commander. It is especially important when the Division HQ is not
in  communication with its superior HQ and must rely on  its  own
initiative to get things moving.
STAFF.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This value is a subjective
evaluation of the amount of preparation the Division HQ  and  its
commander have done for the battle. Factors which are included in
this  rating  are  battlefield familiarity  (recon),  extent  and
detail  of  the briefings given to subordinates, staff experience
and  the  overall  confidence of the division in  its  commander.
These are the same criteria used to rate the Army and Corps staff
values.
Brigades
BRIGADE  I.D. Enter a 1-3 character name to identify the  brigade
or its commander. IBM users can enter a 1-9 character name.
UNIT SIZE (IBM Only). Enter a 1-3 character name to identify  the
size  of  the  unit; e. g. Bde, Rgt, Bn or Bty. This is  cosmetic
only and appears on the unit roster in the IBM version.
LOCATION. Enter the x, y map co-ordinates of the brigade's  start
or arrival hex.
CORPS.  Enter a number between 0 and 15. This number helps define
the  place  the  brigade will occupy in the order of  battle.  An
entry  of  1-15 places the brigade directly under the command  of
the  Corps HQ identified by that number. An entry of 0 means that
the  brigade is not under the command of any of the corps in  the
game.
DIVISION.  Enter  a  number between 0 and 39. This  number  helps
define  the place the brigade will occupy in the order of battle.
An entry of 1-39 places the brigade directly under the command of
the  Division HQ identified by that number. An entry of  0  means
that the brigade is not under the command of any of the divisions
in  the game. Note that if both Corps and Division values are  0,
then the brigade will be under the direct command of the Army HQ.
ARRIVAL.  Enter a number between 0 and 95. This is the turn  that
the  brigade will arrive on the map. An arrival number of 0 means
the brigade begins the game deployed on the map.
BRIGADE   TYPE. Enter a value of 0-3. A value of 0  specifies  an
infantry  brigade,  a  value of 1 specifies  a  mounted  infantry
brigade, a value of 2 specifies a cavalry brigade and a value  of
3 specifies an artillery brigade.
OBJECTIVE. Enter a value between 0 and 23. A value of 0 specifies
no  objective; any other value identifies a particular objective.
In   general,  the  only  brigades  which  need  objectives   are
independent  brigades attached to Corps or Army HQs  or  brigades
scheduled  as reinforcements. If a reinforcing brigade  does  not
have  an  objective,  it  will mill about  for  one  turn  before
receiving instructions from its superior HQ.
SMALL  ARMS  TYPE. Enter a value between 0 and 31. A value  of  0
specifies  that the brigade is not equipped with  small  arms.  A
value  of  1-31 specifies which small arms type from the  weapons
list has been issued to the brigade.
ARTILLERY  TYPE. Enter a value between 0 and 31.  A  value  of  0
specifies  that  the brigade is not equipped  with  artillery.  A
value  of  1-31 specifies which artillery type from  the  weapons
list has been issued to the brigade.
TROOP  STRENGTH.  Enter a value between  0  and  31.  This  value
describes the size of the brigade in increments of 100 men.
MOVEMENT.  Enter a value between 0 and 15. It is  the  number  of
movement points the brigade has available each turn to move  over
the  map.  We  recommend that Infantry and artillery brigades  be
given  4-8  MPs, mounted infantry and cavalry brigades 6-12  MPs.
Brigades   which  were  capable  of  particular   initiative   or
enthusiasm  can be given a 1-3 MP bonus. The final  value  chosen
should  also  take into account the movement point costs  of  the
terrain on the battlefield.
ARTILLERY  STRENGTH. Enter a value between 0 and 15.  This  value
specifies the number of artillery pieces in the brigade. For  all
Civil  War  battles, we recommend that 1 point of this  value  be
equal  to  2  pieces of artillery. Thus, a typical 6 gun  battery
attached to a brigade would have an artillery strength of 3.
SHATTERED. Enter a number between 0 and 1. A value of 0 indicates
that  the brigade begins the game in a normal condition. A  value
of 1 indicates that the brigade begins the game suffering from  a
recent mauling. The effect is the same as for a brigade shattered
in the course of the game.
LEADERSHIP.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This  value  measures
the  experience,  confidence  and determination  of  the  brigade
commander. It is especially important when the brigade is not  in
communication  with  its superior HQ and must  rely  on  its  own
initiative to get things moving.
COHESION. Enter a value between 0 and 7. This value should be set
at  7  unless  the  scenario begins in the middle  of  a  battle.
Cohesion  measures the current fighting condition of the  brigade
as described in the game routines section.
EXPERIENCE.  Enter  a  number between 0 and  7.  0  =  green  and
unreliable (but not necessarily useless), 7 = elite troops of the
highest  quality (for example the Iron Brigade or  the  Stonewall
Brigade). The average brigade should have an experience between 3
and  5, although this value should increase toward the end of the
war; especially for Confederate brigades.
REGIMENTS. Enter a number between 0 and 7. This number  specifies
the  number of regiments (or major sub-units) which make  up  the
brigade.   It   is  a  very  good  indicator  of  the   brigade's
flexibility.
LIKELIHOOD.  Enter a value between 0 and 7. This  value  measures
the likelihood of a brigade appearing on its start or arrival hex
at  the  scheduled time. A value of 7 means that the  brigade  is
certain to arrive. HQs or brigades on the same side with the same
likelihood value will be delayed by the same number of turns.
(iv). Objectives (Menu 12)
Examine the blank objective chart in Appendix A.
A  maximum  of  23  objectives per scenario can be  created.  The
<FORWARD> and <BACK> lines in the menu window are used  to  bring
up  the  next  objective. The <EDIT> line is used  to  enter  the
objective  and  set  its  parameters.  The  <MAP>  line   is   an
alternative method of positioning the objective on the map.
Each  objective must be given a 1-11 character name and an  x,  y
map location.
Victory points for each side can be awarded for the possession of
an  objective on a turn by turn basis throughout the game  and/or
at the end of the game.
When  awarding  points throughout the game, you must  select  the
turn  that point scoring will begin and the turn on which it will
end.
If  you wish to create an objective simply as a signpost for  the
direction  of  your troops, then don't assign  any  VPs  for  its
possession.
A  manoeuvre  value  of 0-15 is available to  make  a  particular
objective  more  attractive to the computer's movement  routines.
The  higher the value, the more likely is the computer  to  route
troops through that point. The best way to get the feel for  this
tool is to have a careful look at the historical scenarios. Then,
if  the  troops in your scenario are reluctant to go the way  you
want them to, experiment with the manoeuvre value.
(c). TITLE (Menu 15)
Enter  a  1-16 character name for the scenario. There are  up  to
three  26  character  lines you can use for a  sub-title  to  the
scenario.
Enter  a  1-9  character name to identify the North  nationality.
Enter  a  1-9  character name to identify the South  nationality.
These  character names will be the ones appearing  in  the  first
game menu; i.e. Menu H (Game Master).
(d). BRIEFING (Menu 14)
(i). Rosters (Menu 15)
There  are two items to enter here. The advice window allows  you
to  enter several paragraphs of handy hints for each side.  These
can be accessed during the game from Menu 12.
The  roster menu should only be edited once you have entered  all
the data for your forces. The display shows your forces organised
in  a  standard military way. All you have to do is tidy  up  the
appearance  by  inserting line spaces to  make  the  roster  look
professional.  Look at one of the scenarios to see  what  can  be
done. To do it, use the arrow keys to select the <EDIT> line  and
then  the  arrow keys again to move the bar cursor  to  the  line
below  where you wish to insert a space. Hit (RET) to insert  the
space. Blank lines are identified by the word <insert>. To remove
a blank line, position the bar cursor over the blank line and hit
(RET).
(ii). Scenario Setup (Menu 16)
Enter  the  turn, day, month, year and century that the  scenario
begins.
A maximum movement distance (in hexes) must be specified for each
type   of  unit.  A  separate  specification  is  made  for  each
nationality.  Enter a value between 0 and 15. We  recommend,  for
Civil War battles, these values; infantry brigades (4-6), mounted
infantry  brigades  (6-9),  artillery  brigades  (4-9),   cavalry
brigades (6-12) and HQs (9-15).
To recreate the conditions of a surprise attack, enter a value of
1 in the <Encamped> line for a side which is caught unprepared by
the enemy assault. If there is no surprise, enter a value of 0.
To  allow  a side to construct battlefield entrenchments  in  the
course  of  the scenario, enter a value of 1-7 in the  <Entrench>
line.  A  value  of  0 means a side cannot construct  battlefield
entrenchments. Entrenchments increase the cover value of  a  hex.
The  higher  the entrenchment value, the more protection  a  unit
will receive.
In  addition to the victory points awarded for the occupation  of
objectives,  points  are also awarded for causing  casualties  to
enemy leaders and troops. A value of 0-31 can be entered for each
category.
IBM  Only.  A  combat value of 0-7 has been added to reflect  the
change in unit density in combat as the war progressed; i.e.  the
lethality  of  the  rifled musket forced troops  to  abandon  the
exposed formations characteristic of the Napoleonic Wars. A value
of  0  describes very exposed formations; a value of 7  describes
formations deployed to minimise enemy firepower.
(iii). Scenario Details (Menu 16)
Examine the blank briefing form in Appendix A as well as  any  of
the scenarios.
A  scenario may last as long as 4 days. These routines  fill  out
much  of  the  background information necessary to get  the  game
moving.
For  each  day the expected atmospheric weather must be  defined,
whether  each  side  is expected to take the  offensive  must  be
decided and three values must be entered for each of the 24 hours
in a day.
WEATHER.  Enter a value between 0 and 4. 0 = clear, 1 = overcast,
2 = drizzle, 3 = rain, 4 = snow.
NORTH  OFFENSIVE. Enter a value of 0 or 1. A value of 0 puts  the
North  on the defensive for the day. A value of 1 puts the  North
on the offensive for the day.
SOUTH  OFFENSIVE. Enter a value of 0 or 1. A value of 0 puts  the
South  on the defensive for the day. A value of 1 puts the  South
on the offensive for the day.
MODE.  Enter a value between 0 and 3. 0 = night, 1 =  dawn,  2  =
dusk, 3 = day.
MOVE. Enter a value between 0 and 3. 0 = no move, normal cohesion
recovery  will occur; 1 = normal move, both sides will  move  and
fight; 2 = end game, a normal move is completed and then the game
ends; 3 = skip, no move and no cohesion recovery is allowed.
FOG. Enter a value between 0 and 2. 0 = no fog, 1 = light fog,  2
= heavy fog.

5. WARPAINT
WarPaint  is entirely new to wargame construction. Even  we  are
amazed  at just how useful it is. Every icon in the game  can  be
edited, including all unit and terrain icons.
5.1 WARPAINT (Menu 17)
The  <GRAPHICS> line gives access to the icon editor. The <STORE>
and  <RECALL> lines are used to install or extract a graphics set
from any save game or scenario disk.
To  transfer the graphics from one scenario to another, you would
execute  the following steps. Load the source scenario,  and  use
the  <STORE>  line  to load the graphics. Remove  that  disk  and
insert  the  destination disk. Load the destination scenario  and
use  <RECALL>. The graphics that were in the source scenario  are
now  in  the destination scenario. Save the altered scenario  and
the change is permanent.
The  <FULL  MAP>  line gives IBM users access to  the  "full-map"
graphic routines.
5.2 DESIGN GRAPHICS (Menu 18)
The screen shows a large boxed section on the left. This shows  a
pixel  by pixel representation of an icon. Below it the  icon  is
shown  in  white and the allowable colours as it would look  upon
the  screen.  The icon number is shown above the  menu  box.  The
current  selected colour is shown below the menu  box.  Selecting
the  <EDIT> line shows a flashing cursor in the top left  of  the
icon  box.  The  box is fourteen elements across by  16  elements
down. The presence of a pixel is shown by a white square and  its
absence by a white dash.
The  I,  J, K, and M keys or the arrow keys are used to move  the
cursor around the icon box. At any location the (RET) key creates
a  pixel if none is present and removes it if one is. As you make
changes  in the large icon box these are reflected in  the  small
icons at the bottom of the screen.
The  rules  for  manipulating  the  screen  icons  are  a  trifle
complicated  and  may vary from computer to  computer.  They  are
explained in detail below.
After  using the edit function type (ESC) to leave. Apple  II/C64
users will be asked to <SAVE> or <IGNORE> their changes and  must
make  this  choice before returning to Menu 21.  Choosing  <SAVE>
incorporates any changes you have made while <IGNORE> returns the
icon  to its previous shape. IBM users have access to the  <CLIP>
function described below.
The  <COLOR> option allows you to change the selected  colour  of
the icon. The <STORE> and <RECALL> options allow you transfer  an
icon  between  different icon numbers, allowing easy  variations.
The  <CLEAR> option blanks the screen, and for IBM users, at  the
same time transfers the previous image to the clip location.  The
<CLIP> option restores the screen with the image currently in the
clip location.
5.3 "FULL-MAP" GRAPHICS (Menus 19-21)
These  notes offer some suggestions for the use of the "full-map"
graphics  available  to IBM users with EGA or  VGA  cards  and  a
colour  monitor. Read the note at the end of text in Menu 8  (Map
Create  Utility).  It  explains how to  disable  the  "full  map"
graphics so the basic map can e created.
Users  with  EGA  or  VGA cards can access our enhanced  graphics
routines  for  the 250 icons which make up the different  terrain
shapes  and  the  60 odd icons which represent  units  and  other
functions.
The  cumbersome  <SAVE>  and <IGNORE>  lines  from  the  standard
graphic routines have been replaced by a 'Clip' feature. Whenever
you edit a shape, the original shape is transferred to the 'clip'
window.  To  restore the original shape, select <CLIP>  from  the
menu window.
The  enhanced  graphics  routines have  a  number  of  additional
features. Select <PAINT> to bring up the enhanced graphic menu.
<EDIT>  will take you into the icon image. Use the arrow keys  to
locate the pixel you wish to edit. Use the Tab/Shift Tab keys  to
select  a  colour from the palette at the bottom of  the  screen.
Type  <d> to set the drag key. This will trail the chosen  colour
after the cursor. Type <d> again to turn off the drag feature.
<TRIAL MAP> will show you what your terrain shape will look  like
on a full screen.
<CHNGE  CLR> allows you to change a particular colour to another.
Select  <CHNGE CLR> and then use the arrow keys to locate on  the
terrain shape the colour you wish to change. Now hit (ENTER)  and
use  the arrow/tab keys to locate from the palette the colour you
wish to substitute.
<SHIFT>  shunts the terrain shape in the direction  specified  by
the  chosen  arrow  key. Use this feature to  vary  a  particular
terrain shape.
<FLIP HORZ> will flip the shape horizontally.
<FLIP VERT> will flip the shape vertically.
<MAKE HEX> will bring in the corresponding terrain shape from the
standard graphic routines.
The f1-f8 and Alt f1-f8 keys will select a particular colour. The
f9 key will select the colour under the cursor. Tab/Shift Tab and
+/- will select the next colour in either direction.
A  little familiarity with these routines will teach you all  you
need to know.

TECHNICAL NOTES
(a).  IBM  Users. IBM users have neither pixel nor  colour-mixing
problems!  The  CGA card has fewer colour choices  than  the  EGA
card.  Note  that  Tandy  users have the same  number  of  colour
choices as an EGA user.
(b). Icon Functions. All icons have a particular function. In the
case  of  the terrain icons (numbers 0 to 31), the functions  and
the name are defined in the terrain menu. All other icons serve a
particular  purpose  which  does not  change.  If  you  edit  the
Confederate  Army HQ icon to look like a woods  symbol,  it  will
still function as an Army HQ.
