        Since this documentation is a "how to win" guide for windwalker, so if

you want to enjoy this game to the fullest extent, you should really stop 

reading this. However all you want is the fighting actions and to see the end

fast, or just getting stuck, this will definitely help.



The first thing you should do in windwalker is training, get yourself familiar

with the various moves [especially the ranges and recover time (ie. time to 

recover from the attack movement) of all the attack forms that you have] and

the enemies of course.





This is a pseudo map of the realm: (realtive position only)





        retired

        assasin house                   thief hide          isle of Death

                                        out                       



                Medicine Man

                House

                                        Imperial Palace

                        2nd shrine      

                                

                        2nd village

                                



                                                                Monastary





                                1st shrine              explorer's

                                                        home

                        1st village

                                                                





                Medicine man 

                house                                   

        

                

Section 1: ( getting started )

                

After "vigorous" training, you can venture forth into the "Real World", the

first thing you should do is to find some thiefs or assasin and kill them for 

money and food.  Use the money to buy incense, food ( if necessary ).  Then

go to the shrine to the north of the village(1st village) and talk to the 

monk about incense, he will blessed your incense. Then read the scroll in the

holy shrine.  This scroll will tell you how to use the incense.  



Note :



1. When you burn the incense, you will be prompted for the "prayer" to chant

these prayers are recorded in the scroll in the shrine.

They are :



        Heal my Body, Restore my Honor, Empower my spirit, Exorcise(fireball)

‰

their function are self explanatory, and they required blessed incense.



2. If you are having trouble beating up the thief and assasin, here is an easy

way to "go about it".  First, when you see an enemy and then save the game,

after you engage him, and the combat isn't going your way, press <q> and run 

away. This will get you back to the "overhead" screen. Choose recall game and 

do the fight again until you win.



3. You will see a blind man in front of the store, give him the money he asked

you and ask him about his shoe, buy this shoe, it will come in use later.



Section 2: (after you feel ready to leave the 1st village, ie. you can take on

            tougher foes.)



Get a boat near the shore and sail east of the holy shrine(1st shrine) until

you find the island with a house on it, this is the explorer's house. Go

inside and get the map in the cabinet, this is the best map available in the

game.(you will also find a scroll that is a clue to solve the game but it's 

not important because you have me). After that go to the monastary(mark as

a walled circular building in the explorer map).  Speak to the older monk 

inside, he will ask you if you want to join their brotherhood.  You will

of course join them ( because they will give you the Staff and Robe ).



Note.



1. In order to join the monks, you 'll have to follow the way of life for one

   day and observer the vow of silence.  This mean following the older monk 

   the whole day.  After that you are tested in combat against yourself, if 

   you win, you will get the staff and robe



2. There are scrolls on the second story of the monastary, the one about 

   Nubia is essential in winning the game.  But read them all anyway.



3. If you happen to see another boat in the sea hail it. If it is the fisher-

   man, ask him about buying supplies and buy 4 striped turtle shells.

   (the shell is about 10 bucks each)



4. If you happen to pass an island where the Heron bird is resting (standing)

   on, disembark and run into the Heron, this will gives you some heron feath-

   ers.



Section 3: ( getting magical talisman )



        There are four magical talisman in this game, each one requires a 

special item and a striped turtle shell  for the Shaman ( living in a cave

on the Northwest corner of the Isle of Dead. [approach the island from 

the northwest corner] ) to make.  Here are the list and where to find them



Talisman        Items required                  Comments 

                (beside the shell)



Invisibility    Blind man's shoe        buy it from the blind man.

                                        Mantra is : unseen presence



‰WaterWalk       water beetle manibles  While invisible attack a Water beetle

                                        The beetles can be found in water in 

                                        the Isle of Dead or a cavern Northeast

                                        of the Imperial Palace.

                                        Mantra is : the solid path



Invulenbility   Sea dragon's scale      While invisible and water walking, at-

                                        tack a sea dragon. The dragons can be 

                                        found in the water of the Isle of Dead

                                        Mantra is : the armored one



Levitation      Heron's feather         Heron's feather

                                        Mantra is : on the wing



After obtaining the require item and a striped turtle,  go to the shaman and

ask him about "things" and then the name of the talisman.



Note. while on the Isle of Dead, and it happens to be full moon, go to the 

      cavern which is just southwest of the Shaman's cave where the tree of

      Immortality grows, there the normal Panda guarding the tree will reveal

      his true form as the God of Luck, he will give you the peach seed that

      is required to win the game.



      After you get the Invulenbility talisman, you have pretty much finished

      the game, because when you use it, you won't take damage from any 

      combat and the talisman only drain your spirit at a slow rate and the

      money from the defeated foes can be use to purchase incense by the

      truck load and replenish your loss spirit.  You can literally start a

      massacre of the Warlord's allies.

         



Section 4: (knocking off your arch-enemies , the warlord and the alchemist)



Once you have the invulenbility talisman, walk into the palace with your monk

robe on. Go to the building in the back. March up (kill any foolish guards who

happened to be in your way (or maybe you just hate his face)) the stairs and

meet the warlord.  With the talisman, this should be no problem.



On any night of a new moon ( preferably the 1st night), go inside the palace

(this can be done before obtaining the talisman but you should had the monk

robe on to pass through the guards at the front door, unless you go inside the

palace from the secret entrance from the cave where the water beetles are), go

to the building in the lower right corner. Copy the scroll on the table and

go upstairs to the astral gate ( you 'll see the alchemist waiting outside the

gate doing absolutely nothing.) wait until it is midnight ( you can actually

sleep there), when the alchemist go in the astral gate, cast an "exorcise"

(fireball) at the gate. (this will sealed up the gate and trap the alchemist

within.   After that you will have to go back to the two shrines and save it

from the spirit the Alchemist brought from the Astral Plane. All you have to

do is cast an "exorcise"(fireball) at the pocessed priest(monk) in the shrine



Note. Be careful while casting the exorcise, it takes a lot of spirit. You

      need a full spirit to cast it.



Section 5: ( to save the emperor )

Assuming you have kicked the Warlord and the Alchemist, you 'll have to save

the Empreror who is now imprisoned and drugged.  You 'll have to make an 

antidote to free the emperor from the "Fu Ma Ren" drug. You 'll have to 

get a copy of the Alchemist scroll to the medicine man in the SW corner of 

the realm and he will informed you that he has no knowledge of making the

antidote and refer you to the 2nd medicine man hiding in the cave just NE of

the Imperial Palace and give you a letter of introduction.  Go to this 2nd 

medicine man and he 'll give you a key (which open the cabinet in his house)

and ask you to fetch a copy of the scroll found in the cabinet.  This scroll

will tell you the 5 ingredients needed for the antidote. They are:



Rhino horn - in the Warlord's cabinet in his room ( get the keys from the

                                 concubines)



Jasimine flower - From the Nubian Princess living in the bottom left corner

                                                of the Warlord's house ( back building in the Palace )

                                                The Princess doesn't speak English, so when you are talk-

                                                ing to her, first say "Salah"(hello), then "dohnteh"(tea)

                                                and then "pluumfir"(flower the Jasmine flower)



Seed from the tree of Immortality - from The Isle of Death ( see above



Gold - given by the explorer when you go to rescue him in the Thief's hideout



Jade - found underneath the throne in the throne room ( central building in

                 palace )

                 

                 

Once you have all five of these ingredients, go back to the cave with a copy 

of the scroll from the 2nd medicine man's cabinet.  The second medicine man

will then leave the cave and go back to his house to make the antidote, 

follow him to his place and wait until he is finished to the Antidote.

Once you have the antidote, go to the jail ( SW corner of Palace, and use

invisibility to avoid the Jailer ).  Go to the 3rd cell ( counting from

left to right ) and open the door with the key the Warlord had dropped 

when he fled. There you will see the emperor and once you give him the 

antidote and he 'll recover and Moebiuse will elevate you to the level

of "Windwalker" and End game

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      



PS : 

        There is a lot of interesting feature in Windwalker, for example

if you talk to the Nubian Princess while she is bathing, your honor will 

got deducted, and you can actually go through the Astral gate into the 

Astral Plane, etc... Try them out, it's fun



        If anyone of you manage to explore the entire Astral Plane, tell

me about it.



        I have included my own savegame in this solution for those who just want to

see the ending, all you have to do is load it and talk to the emperor and give 

hime the antidote.  The filename is end.zip ( character name is Crusader )



PPS :



        Here are the titles of different levels in the doc. check in level 

advancement:



mongoose, badger, boar, wolf, lion, bear

barracude, manta, octopus, shark, dolphin, whale

raven, owl, heron, falcon, condor, phoenix

viper, cobra, crocodile, python, hydra, dragon

Windwalker 



 

