ZORK 2

Regarding the Wizard

The Wizard of Frobozz can appear at any point and may cast various
spells on you when he does. Most of them are harmless or merely
inconvenient, and the best course of action is simply to do nothing and
wait until the effect has worn off. Cast at the wrong time, though,
their effects can occasionally cause you to die or get into an
unsolvable state with regards to the puzzles. You'll take care of the
Wizard eventually, but until that point, I recommend you save your game
regularly, just in case.


The Garden Area

Take the lamp and sword. Go south, south, south, southwest, south (don't
worry about this one turn in the dark) and southeast to North End of
Garden. If you see a "large, white animal" (the unicorn), look at it;
we'll be back for that key later. Enter the gazebo and get the teapot,
then leave the gazebo.

Go north and northeast to Shallow Ford and fill up the teapot with
water. Turn on the lamp, and go south, southwest, and southwest to the
Carousel Room. You feel "sort of disoriented" because this room is
spinning, and this means that you will only succeed in going the
direction you type about 30% of the time.

Try going southeast. If you end up in the Riddle Room, great. If not,
return to the Carousel Room and try again. (southeast from Cool Room,
south from Marble Hall, southwest from Path Near Stream, northeast from
Cobwebby Corridor, west from Topiary, north from Menhir Room)

For Your Amusement: Hang around in the Topiary for a while.


The "Alice" Area

When you make your way to the Riddle Room, answer the riddle by typing
answer "well". Go east to the Pearl Room. Get the necklace. Continue one
more room east to the Circular Room. You are actually at the bottom of a
well here. Get in the bucket, and then pour water into it from the
teapot. After the bucket rises to Top of Well, get out of it by saying
stand. Go east to the Tea Room. You can try reading the cakes, but the
writing's too small to read on all but the green one: "Eat Me". Take all
the cakes, and eat the green cake.

Now that you are in the Posts Room (the legs of the table in the Tea
Room, natch), go east through what was once a small hole to the Pool
Room. Read the red, orange and blue cakes through the flask.
"Evaporate", "Explode", and "Enlarge", huh? Drop the orange "Explode"
cake and throw the red "Evaporate" cake in the pool. Take the candies.
Go west back to the Posts Room and eat the blue "Enlarge" cake.

For Your Amusement: Eat the orange "Explode" or red "Evaporate" cakes.
(save first) Eat the blue "Enlarge" cake in the Pool Room. (save first)
Open the flask. (save first)


The Robot and Room Spinner

Go northwest to the Low Room. Read the paper, which is instructions for
the robot, then drop it. You have to be in the same room as the robot to
give it commands, so to bring it along with you, you have to send it on
ahead (robot, east) and then follow it.

Go east, then south to the Dingy Closet, bringing the robot along. Try
to take the sphere. Tell the robot to lift the cage. Get the sphere and
look into it. Send the robot north, then follow it to the Machine Room.
The buttons here control the room spinner. The square button increases
the spin to high, the round button decreases the spin to low, and the
triangular button switches the field between the Low Room and the
Carousel Room.

Have the robot push the round button, then the triangular one. Go west
to the Low Room, then try to go southeast to the Tea Room. If you wind
up back in the Machine Room, just try again, as with the Carousel Room.
If you made it to the Tea Room, go west to Top of Well and get back in
the bucket. Fill the teapot with water (from the bucket) and you will
descend to the bottom again.

Stand up from the bucket and drop the teapot. Go west twice and
northwest back to the Carousel Room.

For Your Amusement: Push one of the buttons in the Machine Room
yourself. (save first) Set the room-spinner to high, flip the field to
the Low Room, then go west to the Low Room. (save first).


The Dreary Room and the Dragon's Lair

Open the steel box that has appeared and get the violin. Go southwest to
Cobwebby Corridor, get the string, and then go southwest once more to
the Guarded Room. Give the candies to the lizard head to put it to
sleep. Drop the necklace, violin and red sphere here, since this is near
where we'll need them in the future.

Go north, northeast, east, north, north to North End of Garden. Go in to
the gazebo and get everything. Leave the gazebo and go south, west,
southwest, and north to the Marble Hall. Get the "brick" (it's plastic
explosive, actually).

Go north, north, and up to the Tiny Room. Put the place mat under the
door, open the keyhole lid, then put the letter opener in the keyhole.
Remove the letter opener and drop it. Get the place mat, and then get
the key. Unlock the door with it, open the door, drop the key, and go
north into the Dreary Room.

Take the blue sphere and look into it. Go south, down, west, and north
to the Dragon Room. Ooo, big dragon. Attack him with your sword (if the
Wizard has filched your sword, the brick will also work), then leave by
going south. The dragon will follow. Attack him with the sword again to
keep him interested. Go south again, attack the dragon once more, and go
west to the Ice Room.

After the fracas, you will be able to exit west to the volcano region,
but we're not going there just yet.

For Your Amusement: Attack the dragon while under the influence of the
fireproof spell.


The Princess and the Wizard's Rooms

Return east, north, north, and north again to the Dragon's Lair. Kiss
the princess, and she will wake. Wait one turn for her to leave, and
follow her back to the Garden and into the Gazebo (south, east, east,
down, south, wait, east, wait, east, north, in). Wait. Soon, the unicorn
will appear, and you'll have the golden key from its neck as well as a
perfect rose. Smell the rose, then drop it.

Leave the gazebo and go south, south, west, southwest, and southwest to
the Guarded Room. Unlock the door with the gold key. Drop the key here
with your pearls and violin. Get the red sphere.

Open the door and go south, then west twice to the Aquarium Room. Throw
your sword at the aquarium to break the glass. (If your sword has been
filched, the steel box from the Carousel Room will also work.) Get the
clear sphere. Go east to the Wizard's Workroom. Put the clear sphere on
the diamond stand, the ruby sphere on the red stand, and the blue sphere
on the sapphire stand. Pick up the black sphere that appears. Look into
the black sphere. (And now that you have it, the next time you run into
the Wizard, notice what he does!)

For Your Amusement: Attack the princess. (save first) Read the Wizard's
degree from GUE Tech (in the Trophy Room, one south of the Wizard's
Workshop). Repeatedly look in the Wizard's Quarters (one south from the
Aquarium Room). Break the aquarium glass directly rather than by
throwing an object. (save first) Take the serpent. (save first)


The Volcano

Go east, north three times, down, and west into the Lava Room. Pick up
the moby ruby and continue south to Volcano Bottom.

The odd wicker basket and cloth bag contraption here is a hot air
balloon. Enter the basket, open the receptacle, and then put the
newspaper in it. Light a match and burn the newspaper. Read the label
that drops from the balloon as it inflates, then drop the label. The
balloon will begin to rise. Wait one turn until you come to Volcano Near
Small Ledge, and land. Tie the wire to the hook, and then get out of the
balloon.

Get the zorkmid, then go south to the Library. Open the purple book and
get the stamp. Return north to the balloon and get in. Untie the wire
from the hook. Wait three turns until you are at Volcano Near Wide
Ledge. Land and tie the wire to the hook. Stand and go south to the
Dusty Room. Put the brick in the hole, insert the string in the brick,
and then light a match and burn the string. Immediately return north.

After the explosion, go back south and get the crown. Read the card.
...Uh oh. Hurry back north, enter the basket, and untie the wire. Close
the receptacle to smother the fire, and the balloon will gradually
deflate and let you descend back to Volcano Bottom (wait 6 times). Drop
the card and matches. Stand to get out of the basket.

Go north, east, east, southeast, southwest, and southwest to the Guarded
Room. Drop your treasures (crown, stamp, zorkmid, and ruby) and head all
the way back to the Dragon Room: north, northeast, north three times,
west, and north. Go north into the Lair and open the chest twice. Take
the statuette, and then go south and west twice into the Bank Entrance.

For Your Amusement: Read the purple and white books. Hang around in the
Dusty Room while the brick explodes. (save first) Go all the way up and
out the top of the volcano in the balloon, or leave it moored at Wide
Ledge and wait inside it for the ledge to collapse. (save first)


The Bank

Go northwest or northeast into the Teller's Room, then west (if you went
northwest) or east (if you went northeast) into the Safety Depository.
Read the paper on the ground, and then drop it. Read the cube. Go south
to the Chairman's Office and take the portrait. Return north.

The north wall in the Safety Depository is actually made out of light,
and can be walked through to teleport to other Bank locations. The
direction from which you entered the Depository controls your
destination. If you come in from the east or west, you go to the East or
West Viewing Rooms; if from the south, you go to the Small Room; if from
the north, you go to the Vault. Walk through north wall. Leave the Small
Room by walk through south wall, thus entering the Depository from the
north. Walk through north wall again to be transported to the Vault.

Get the bills, and then walk through the north wall once more. If you
try to leave now, you'll set off an alarm, so drop the bills and the
portrait. Exit the room to the east or west, and then return east (if
you went east) or west (if you went west) into the Safety Depository.
Pick up the bills and portrait and walk through the north wall again.
You will now be transported to the East or West Viewing Room, from which
you can safely go south to the Bank Entrance.


Summoning the Demon

Go east, east, south, south, and southeast to the Carousel Room. Take a
quick detour west and pick up the can of grue repellent. Go east,
southwest, and southwest to the Guarded Room. Pick up what you can with
get all and start transporting treasures to the Pentagram Room, south,
west, and south of here. This will take a couple of trips (north, east,
north back to the Guarded Room); when dropping items, make sure to keep
hold of your lamp, the black sphere, and the can of grue repellent.

The treasures you need are: pearl necklace, gold key, dragon statuette,
violin, portrait, moby ruby, zorkmid bills, crown, Flathead stamp, and
zorkmid coin. (Treasures the WIzard has filched from you and any you had
in your possession when/if you have died are not required.)

When finished, put the black sphere in the pentagram to summon the
demon. Pick up the treasures and give them to the demon. After he
finally agrees to do you a service, say demon, give me the wand, then
get the wand. (Other possibilities are demon, kill the wizard, which the
demon seems to find quite cathartic, or demon, move the menhir. This
last, however, does not dispose of the wizard's power.) If the wizard
has filched anything from you, you can take this opportunity to go to
the Trophy Room (north, east, and south) and filch it back, if you like.
(To filch your sword, refer to it as "elvish sword" to distinguish it
from the others.)

For Your Amusement: Ask the demon to kill Cerberus. Play around with the
wand. To cast a spell, point or wave the wand at something and say
"[spell]". Unfortunately for the cause of said amusement, you cannot
point the wand at yourself, and not everything is an appropriate target.
I have therefore not been able to figure out exactly what all the spells
do. The possible spells are:

fall (makes target trip and fall when they move) float (makes an object
float) freeze (makes target unable to move) fence (makes target unable
to leave the room: "An invisible fence of magical force bars your way")
fierce (enrages target) ferment (makes target drunk) fear (makes target
afraid and run from the room) feeble (makes target weak and unable to
carry much or fight) fumble (reduces target's carrying capacity,
possibly making them drop items) filch (steals a possession from target)
fantasize (makes target hallucinate) fireproof fry (destroys target "in
a puff of smoke"; when the Wizard casts it on you, you get a much more
dramatic description of being struck by lightning) fudge ("a strong odor
of chocolate permeates the room") fluoresce (makes an object glow with
light; I speculate this is the spell later seen in the Enchanter games
as frotz) free frobizz frobozzle frobnoid


The Oddly-Angled Rooms and the Crypt

From the Pentagram Room, go north, east, north, north, northeast, and
south to the Menhir Room. Point the wand at the menhir and say "float".
Go southwest into the Kennel. Get the collar and return northeast. Go
south, then down into the Oddly-angled Room maze.

This is actually a baseball diamond (…"oddly-angled" Implementor brains,
if you ask me!). The solution is to walk in the sequence of directions
of a standard baseball diamond, starting from the pitcher's mound. (The
pitcher faces west, hence a left-handed pitcher being a "southpaw".) You
may wish to save the game before you start moving.

In the room with the stairway, examine diamond. (You don't see this
diamond in the room description until you leave the room and come back.)
If the diamond is not already dark, alternate east and west until it
turns dark. Then go west (the "club" here is a baseball bat; you're at
home plate), southeast, northeast, northwest, and southwest. You will
hear "a strange rusty squeal echoing in the distance".

Go west back to the room with the stairway and go down to the Cerberus
Room. Put the collar on Cerberus. Go east, then open the door into the
Crypt and go south. Apply the grue repellent to yourself and turn off
your lamp. Open the secret door you can now see, and - congratulations,
moby adventurer - go south to Zork III.

For Your Amusement: Wander around the Oddly-Angled Rooms while under the
influence of the fantasize spell. Pet or kill Cerberus after collaring
him. Remove Cerberus' collar. Cast all the spells on Cerberus. Die after
freeing the demon (kill me with sword, if nothing else serves).

For Your Amusement at various times: Diagnose whenever the Wizard has
just cast a spell on you (especially ferment, freeze, float, or feeble).
Try to move around while you are under the float spell. Cast several
spells in succession without waiting for the wand to recharge. When the
robot and the Wizard are both in the room, tell the robot to take the
wand.