DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR
Strategic Studies Group (SSG)
SCENARIOS (VOL II)

GAINES MILL
June 27th, 1862
During McClellan's retreat from Richmond, known as the  Seven
Days,  many  battles and skirmishes were fought. One  of  the
deadliest was fought on 27th June on Turkey Hill, near Gaines
Mill.
Lee had expected McClellan to make a stand along the line  of
Powhite  Creek.  A. P. Hill sent in his lead brigade  against
the riflemen clustered around a building known as Gaines Mill
and,  after a short fire-fight, the enemy retreated. Lee  was
just  thinking that the whole exercise had been far too  easy
when  there  was  the sound of heavy firing and  Hill's  lead
brigade  came back at the double. Hill brought up three  more
brigades  and, as Longstreet was arriving on the right,  sent
them  in again. Again, the heavy firing and again the  troops
came back, wild-eyed and diminished in number.
Two  miles east of Gaines Mill was a creek known as Boatswain
Swamp. It flowed through a clear, boggy area around the front
of  the  flat-topped  Turkey Hill. Three  separate  lines  of
infantry, one above the other, were dug in and the crest  was
bristling with guns. Fitz-John Porter had three divisions and
orders to hold the hill while the rest of the army retreated,
and he and his men were determined to do just that.
Lee  ordered Longstreet to make a demonstration on the  right
while  he  found out what had happened on the  opposite  wing
where  D.  H. Hill and Jackson were supposed to be  attacking
and drawing defenders towards them. He found that Jackson had
been  delayed by taking a wrong road and had ordered Hill  to
delay  his attack also. Lee ordered Ewell to go in on  A.  P.
Hill's left in support while he sorted things out.
A. P. Hill's men, by this time, had had enough. "You need not
go  in"  they said to Ewell's veterans. "We are whipped;  you
can't do anything". The veterans, unimpressed, went in at the
charge.  Again, the triple line of fire and the  guns  roared
out, and such men as were still standing promptly ran back.
The  only solution seemed to be a general assault, all  along
the line. By 5 o'clock, Lee had all his men in position in  a
near semi-circular arc; in order from north to south were  D.
H.  Hill, Ewell, Jackson, A. P. Hill and Longstreet.  As  the
attack went in Hood's Texas brigade and Law's brigade punched
through into the centre.
Porter  had,  by  this  time, been re-inforced  with  another
division and was feeling confident. McClellan had sent orders
to  hold  on  until dark and had indicated that he  would  be
sending reinforcements. As the massed attack came in his  men
fired,  reloaded  and fired at incredible speed.  Hood's  and
Law's  brigades lost nearly a thousand men before  they  even
reached  Boatswain Swamp but they took their losses and  kept
coming  and as they closed to bayonet range the Union  centre
panicked  and broke. Fourteen guns and two complete regiments
were captured at the point of breakthrough.
Still, this was not the same army that had scattered at First
Bull   Run.  In  the  falling  dusk  the  retreat  was   made
successfully,  covered  by 6,000 unperturbed  regulars  under
Sykes and two fresh brigades sent in as re-inforcements.  Lee
had captured 22 guns, over 2,000 prisoners and had control of
the  field  and could thus claim a victory but  he  had  lost
8,500  men  in  the  process.  Porter,  including  the  2,000
prisoners,   had  lost  6,837  but  had  held  his   position
throughout  the day. It is unlikely that he was unhappy  with
the result.
PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION.  As  the  Union  Commander at Gaines  Mill  Your  main
decisions will be in the employment of your reserves.  Superb
employment  of reserve brigades was the keynote  in  Porter's
defence at Gaines Mill, to emulate his success observe  Lee's
attacks as they develop and have reserves in position.
CONFEDERATE. The price of victory for the South is the  blood
of  its best men. The only way to minimise your losses is  to
attack  quickly  and  efficiently. Time is  the  most  valued
asset,  establish A. P. Hill and Longstreet's  attack  orders
and,  if necessary, ride North to direct Jackson's men in  an
attempt to flank the Federal lines.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  Jackson's  sluggish arrival was the  primary  cause  of
Southern  problems  in  this battle. Assume  he  had  arrived
earlier. Subtract 2 from the arrival time of Jackson's HQ and
brigades 1-14 and 27; also change their likelihoods to 6.
(2).  While  Porter held off the majority of the  Confederate
Army, McClellan's Force of nearly 60,000 men was bluffed by a
diversion orchestrated by Magruder and Huger with only 25,000
troops.
Repeated  requests for reinforcements by Porter were  denied,
with  only Slocum's Division (Taylor, Barton and Newton)  and
the  Brigades of French and Meagher being released. Had these
units arrived earlier, Porter's position would have been much
less  desperate. To simulate an earlier arrival,  change  the
arrival  turns of brigades 64-66 to 0 and 67-68 to 1.  Change
the likelihood value for brigades 67-68 to 6.

STONES RIVER (MURFREESBORO)
December 31st, 1862
On  the  evening of 30th December 1862, Rosecrans,  advancing
south-east from Nashville, met with Bragg at Stones River, in
front of the town of Murfreesboro. Rosecrans had about 44,000
troops  under the commands of Crittenden, Thomas and  McCook.
Bragg  was defending with about 34,000 under the commands  of
Breckenridge,  Polk  and Hardee. Both commanders  planned  to
attack  the  following morning and each had  the  same  basic
battle-plan  -  to attack the enemy right -  but  only  Bragg
achieved  anything like his intent. Rosecrans had  ordered  a
long  line of campfires to be kindled beyond his right  flank
in  order  to trick Bragg into stripping his own right  where
the attack would land.
The  trick  worked in a sense - Bragg certainly moved  troops
there  -  but the effect was not what Rosecrans had intended.
Ever  methodical, he ordered his troops to attack immediately
after  breakfast. Bragg, however, had ordered his  troops  to
attack  before  breakfast. Hardee ploughed  through  McCook's
three  divisions,  caught by surprise while  the  coffee  was
still brewing. The divisions of Johnson and Davis immediately
routed  but  Sheridan, commander of the third  division,  was
made  of sterner stuff. Polk's Corps was in the fight by  now
and  Withers'  division ran into a determined  defence  in  a
difficult  tangle of rocks, scrub and trees.  Three  separate
charges were repulsed.
Then   Polk's  second  division,  under  Cheatham,   arrived.
Cheatham had the reputation of being the most profane man  in
the  army.  "Give  'em  hell, boys!" he  shouted.  His  corps
commander was handicapped in this regard by being the  Bishop
of  Louisiana  but he was equal to the occasion.  "Give  them
what  General Cheatham says, boys!" he called. "Give 'em what
General  Cheatham  says!"  The  boys  did,  and  despite  the
significant  amount of hell that came their  way  also,  they
forced Sheridan back.
Although  the line was now bent at an angle of nearly  ninety
degrees,  Sheridan's stand had given Rosecrans  the  time  he
needed  to organise a defence. The left flank he anchored  at
the  ford  across Stones River. He then rode back and  forth,
directing the defence in person.
The  critical point in the line was at the bend of the  right
angle  -  a four acre stand of cedars, known locally  as  the
Round Forest and soon to be christened "Hell's Half-Acre"  by
the  soldiers. On the high ground behind the trees, Rosecrans
concentrated his artillery. Bragg attacked repeatedly but  in
a  piecemeal fashion, first with a Mississippi brigade,  then
with  a Tennessee brigade, then with two brigades sent across
by  Breckinridge and finally with another two  brigades  from
the  source. The cotton field in front of Round Forest became
a  shambles of dead and dying men but the attacks  could  not
withstand  the concentrated firepower and none  achieved  the
objective.
When the sun went down at 4.30 pm, Bragg had lost about 9,000
men  but  he  was  aware  that his opponent  had  lost  more,
including  over  3,000 captured in the  first  rush.  He  had
achieved a decisive victory and he knew it. The only  problem
was, no-one had told Rosecrans.
Rosecrans  certainly thought long and hard about retreat  but
in  the  end he decided to hold his position. Throughout  New
Year's  day  the two armies stared at each other while  their
commanders wondered what to do next.
On Jan. 2nd Bragg sent Breckinridge on an ill-advised assault
against the Union right but Rosecrans had had a full  day  to
re-organise his defences and the assault was beaten  back  in
just  over an hour, with more than 1700 casualties. The  next
day,  Bragg received reports that his opponent was  receiving
new supplies and re-inforcements and he realised that he must
withdraw.
Casualties for the battle had been heavy. The North had  lost
13,249   (including  3717  captured)  and  the  South  11,739
(including  2,500  captured). Tactically a bloody  draw,  the
battle  was a strategic victory for the Union. Rosecrans  had
taken Murfreesboro and Northern Tennessee.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  Breckinridge was notified of Van Cleve's initial  moves
across  Stones River and prepared for a Union attack. He  was
not  told,  however, of the Union Division's quick withdrawal
to  support  Rosecrans' crumbling right flank.  Consequently,
Breckinridge failed to immediately comply with Bragg's orders
to  re-deploy across the river and support Polk. This failure
is  simulated  in  the  scenario by the  uncertain  and  late
arrival of Breckinridge's corps HQ. Change the HQ arrival  to
0,  its likelihood to 7, and its location to 14,8 thus giving
Bragg early access to this corps.
(2).  Both  Generals planned to attack their opponents  right
flank;  Bragg  got the jump on Rosecrans with  McCown's  dawn
attack.  The reverse could have been the case. To  assume  it
was,  re-position  McCown's  Division  and  the  two  Western
Brigades  of  Cleburne's Division so they are just  West  and
North  of  Hardee's HQ. Also move Wharton's cavalry  south  2
hexes,  Pegram's cavalry south 3 hexes. Change Breckinridge's
arrival  details as in Variant (1) above. For the North,  Van
Cleve  and  Wood's Divisions, with Morton's  Pioneer  Brigade
should   be   deployed  1  hex  distant  from  Breckinridge's
positions,  Wood  on  Van Cleve's right. Crittenden  and  his
division  commanders'  orders must be changed  to  offensive,
with  Murfree Hill and Murfreesboro as objectives. Also  move
Crittenden's HQ to the East Bank.
PLAYERS NOTES
UNION.  The  Right  flank  will crumble  almost  immediately,
stabilising it is your first priority. However, try  to  keep
your options open with some of Crittenden's' Corps in case  a
quick  thrust for Murfreesboro is possible later in the game;
if not, a central reserve is always useful.
CONFEDERATE.  As Bragg you must drive Hardee  viciously  into
the  Union  right flank gaining ground before the  enemy  can
react.  Breckinridge can be moved to support Polk, or if  not
required,  moved north to skirmish across the  river  at  the
Union left as Polk attacks.

GETTYSBURG
July 1st 3rd, 1863
The  three-day battle fought at Gettysburg was not  initially
intended by either commander. It started when Heth (of Hill's
corps)  marched towards the town, intending to get shoes  for
his   ill-shod  Confederate  soldiers  from  the   Gettysburg
factory. He ran into Buford with two brigades of cavalry  and
matters  escalated from there. Two Union corps  under  Howard
and  Sickles arrived mid-morning and Heth's troops were badly
cut  up.  More  Confederate troops marched  in  and  fighting
increased.  Early, marching down the Harrisburg  road  caught
and  routed  Howard mid-afternoon and soon  the  whole  Union
force was in retreat. Several thousand were captured as  they
tried  to  funnel through the Gettysburg streets.  Those  who
escaped  capture  rallied on Cemetery  Hill,  named  for  the
cemetery on its summit.
Lee  sent  a  message  to Ewell on the  left  to  attack  the
position  if  he thought there was a chance of success.  This
was  the  sort  of  message  he was  accustomed  to  send  to
Stonewall Jackson and it would undoubtedly have sent  Jackson
charging  in  to dislodge the badly shaken Union troops.  But
Jackson  was two months in his grave and Ewell was  uncertain
and  so  did not attack. About 25,000 Confederate and  20,000
Union troops were involved on this first day, with casualties
8,000  and  9,000  respectively (half  of  the  latter  being
prisoners).
During the night the rest of Meade's army, with the exception
of  Sedgwick's corps arrived and took up position. Meade  was
disposed  on  a curved ridge in the approximate shape  of  an
inverted fish-hook with two hills, Little and Big Round  Top,
at the "eye". Lee's plan of attack was to feint with Ewell at
the  barb and attack with Longstreet at the Little Round  Top
end.
Little  Round Top commanded the entire Union position and  it
was  temporarily left uncovered but Brigadier General Warren,
the  Union army's chief engineer, acted on his own initiative
to  cover  the hill. He was just in time, and a nasty  little
regimental level fight ensued, but he held on.
Longstreet had no great belief in the attack but he  sent  it
in,  from  south to north: Hood at 4 pm, McLaws at 5  pm  and
Anderson at 6 pm. Apart from gobbling up a good proportion of
two divisions unwisely posted in a forward salient the attack
achieved  little, which was unsurprising as by now it  was  8
brigades attacking 22 in a solid defensive position. Sedgwick
had arrived while the attack was in progress and was added to
the defence.
At  the other end of the line, Johnston and Early attacked at
7  pm  and  8  pm  respectively. They were  not  particularly
successful  either,  although Early did manage  to  effect  a
lodgement on the point of the hook. By now Meade had his army
together and had 80,000 men and 354 guns against Lee's 50,000
and 272.
The  morning of the third day saw heavy fighting in the north
were  Ewell was lodged. The fight swayed to and fro  but  the
Confederate troops were driven off by mid-morning.
The  main  assault  was  planned for the  Union  centre.  Lee
planned  to  use  Pickett's division (about  4,600  men)  and
Heth's  (about the same number but badly cut up on the  first
day) with a few others to bring the total up to about 11,000.
A  heavy bombardment started about 1.00 pm which pounded  the
Union centre for over an hour and a half, but it caused  only
few  casualties. At 2.30, the Union batteries ceased fire  to
make  the Confederates think they were knocked out or out  of
ammunition and the ruse worked. The main attack came in.
The  Confederate army advanced in beautifully  dressed  lines
across the three quarters of a mile of open ground. The Union
artillery opened fire again and against the massed  ranks  it
was  impossible to miss. Some troops did succeed in  reaching
the  Union  position and even made a brief  breakthrough  but
they  were soon repulsed by the reserve. Barely half of those
who   set   out  returned,  the  attack  having  cost   5,000
casualties.
Remarkably,  Confederate morale was not completely  shattered
and  the army dug in grimly, awaiting Meade's counter-attack.
But  Meade  had  just  seen  the  results  of  attacking   an
entrenched enemy and he didn't feel like trying it  from  the
opposite  point of view. Lee was ultimately able  to  retreat
unmolested.
The  battle was one of the bloodiest of the war with a  total
of   over   50,000  casualties,  23,000  Union   and   28,000
Confederate. Inside the Gettysburg cemetery was a sign, which
had  apparently  escaped  notice: "All  persons  found  using
firearms in these grounds will be prosecuted with the  utmost
rigor of the law."
PLAYERS NOTES (DAY 1 SCENARIO)
UNION.  Placement of Reynold's HQ is critical,  as  directing
the  arriving Union units well is central to your success.  A
position   near   Gettysburg  will  give  a   good   mix   of
communication and brigade control. Of course, the  historical
option  is to lead from the front - and get yourself  killed!
Remember your men can build entrenchments if stationary.
CONFEDERATE.  To win, Lee (you!) will need to quickly  deploy
forward,  using the South's numerical advantage before  Union
help arrives. You must take Gettysburg to have any chance  of
winning.
SCENARIO VARIANTS (DAY 1 SCENARIO)
(1).  The  Campaign Variant. A complete arrival schedule  for
all three days of the Gettysburg battle is already entered in
the  Day  1 scenario. The few changes necessary to  create  a
three day game are listed below.
Enter the Day One page of the briefing screen and change  the
move  column  for turn 10 from 'END' to 'MOVE' by  typing  1.
Change  the Union Army Commander to 'Meade'. The only changes
to Meade's Day 2 scenario values are arrival = 4 and location
=  14,  26.  Change Lee's Army HQ as follows.  Arrival  =  4;
offensive objectives = 12 and 22.
(2).  Delayed Reinforcements. To simulate the uncertainty  of
arrival times for both sides reinforcements, subtract 2  from
the  arrival turn values for all units arriving between turns
6 and 13. Also change the likelihood value for these modified
units to 5.
PLAYER'S NOTES (DAY 2 SCENARIO)
UNION.  Correct management of reserves is central to  winning
Union  tactics.  Anticipate problems by  keeping  a  constant
watch  on  enemy  movements and the condition  of  your  men.
Maintaining communications with your Corps Commanders is more
important than getting involved in the trenches.
CONFEDERATE.   Control  for  the  confederate  commander   is
difficult due to his exterior lines of communication.  Paying
personal visits to your corps commanders' HQs is the best way
of ensuring your plans run smoothly. Experience will show who
needs  a  guiding hand (or you can check up on their  ratings
before  the battle by using WARPLANÖ). To assure victory  the
South must break the Union lines and take at least one of the
major "Big Point" objectives.
SCENARIO VARIANTS (DAY 2 SCENARIO)
(1).  Longstreet  may have placed Hood's  division  north  of
McLaws rather than the historical, more southern position. To
simulate this, move Hood's brigades north, and change  Hood's
and  McLaws'  division  HQ  objectives  to  18,16  and  19,22
respectively.
(2).  The  following brigades are included in the  data  base
with  a minimal chance of arrival due to their failure to  be
committed at Gettysburg. To improve their chances, change the
likelihood values for the following brigades to 2.  Bde  Nos.
8,13,14,15,46,47,118,119,120.

CHICKAMAUGA
September 19th-20th, 1863
The  Chickamauga Creek (chickamauga meaning "stagnant  water"
or, more sensationally, "river of death") flows approximately
north-south  into the Tennessee River, a few  miles  east  of
Chattanooga,   through  heavily  wooded  country.   On   18th
September the armies of Rosecrans - approximately 65,000  men
in  three  corps  under McCook, Thomas and Crittenden  -  and
Bragg - a similar number in five corps divided into two wings
under  Polk  and  Longstreet who had just made  a  long  rail
journey from Virginia with about 12,000 men.
Bragg  had  planned to attack on 18th but delays  meant  that
nothing  happened, except that Rosecrans shifted his position
northward to be nearer the Rossville Gap - his retreat  route
to Chattanooga in an emergency. On 19th the battle started at
the north end of the line when Thomas moved to drive off what
he  thought was a single brigade. This quickly escalated into
a slugging match with both sides pouring in more troops.
Fighting   spread  south  in  the  afternoon  when  Stewart's
division, sent to help against Thomas, accidentally  attacked
a mile to the south. It hit Van Cleve's division and drove it
back  almost  to  Rosecrans' HQ at the Widow  Glenn's  house.
Here,  however,  they  met Reynolds' and  Negley's  divisions
heading  north  and it was suddenly three divisions  to  one.
Stewart  was  obliged to retreat back across the north-south,
Lafayette Road.
As  this attack was failing Hood, without orders, sent in the
divisions of Johnson and Law, immediately to the south. These
met  Davis'  division  which fell back. Again  Widow  Glenn's
house  was in view but again two divisions came to the rescue
-  this time those of Wood and Sheridan, and Johnson and  Law
too had to fall back beyond the road.
As  the sun was setting Cleburne, at the far north end of the
line, attacked and drove Thomas back almost a mile but he was
still  in good order as darkness fell. Throughout the  night,
the   Confederate   soldiers  could   hear   their   northern
counterparts  felling  trees and hurriedly  putting  together
barricades.
Rosecrans was not displeased with the situation. Although  it
had been close at times, his line had held together and there
seemed  to  no reason why it should not continue  to  do  so.
Bragg  also was quite pleased with the way things  had  gone,
despite  the unco-ordinated nature of the day's attacks,  and
he ordered Polk and Hill to attack at dawn.
Or  rather,  he thought he had so ordered, but the  messenger
could  not  find  Hill  in  the  darkness  and  by  the  time
everything  had been sorted out and the attack  finally  sent
in,  it was approaching ten o'clock. Rosecrans' soldiers  had
not been idle during this period of grace and the breastworks
now  had  a  grim and solid look about them.  The  series  of
divisional attacks which Bragg had ordered in the north  were
prosecuted with great enthusiasm but could not break the well
defended line.
The  battle  might well have continued in this  manner  until
Bragg  had  worn his army down to nothing had  not  Rosecrans
here made a catastrophic mistake. His aides reported to him a
"gaping  hole"  between Reynolds' and Wood's  divisions  and,
apparently forgetting his own dispositions, Rosecrans sent an
order to Wood to "close up and support" Reynolds. Brannan was
posted  between the two and the only way Wood  could  support
was  to  go around Brannan, which he did. There he met Thomas
who  said  that Reynolds did not need support - he  had  just
repulsed  an  attack by Stewart, but sent Wood,  on  his  own
(Thomas') responsibility, to reinforce the left. This created
the "gaping hole" which had previously had no reality.
Longstreet,  meanwhile,  had  been  carefully  massing   four
divisions  for  an  attack and, as  Wood's  last  units  were
leaving,  they went in, leaping over the deserted  barricades
and  charging into the vulnerable Union flanks. The army fell
apart,  a  good  third  of it routing  back  to  Chattanooga.
Rosecrans himself went with them to organise a defence  which
might well have been necessary had it not been for Thomas.
Thomas,  in  an action that was to earn him the  nickname  of
"The  Rock  of Chickamauga", refused to succumb to prevailing
panic.   Thus   Kershaw,  rushing  in  with  two  Confederate
brigades,  met  with a bloody repulse. The  Confederate  army
gave  Thomas  everything  it  had  but,  re-inforced  by  two
brigades  from Granger, who had been in reserve guarding  the
Rossville  Gap, managed to more or less hold on  until  dark.
They  were  obliged to leave many of the wounded  behind  and
Bragg was to report a total of more than 8,000 prisoners.
The Confederate victory had been at a terrible cost, however.
Final casualties were 16,170 for the Union and 18,454 for the
Confederacy,  including in the latter case,  14,674  wounded.
For the number of men involved, this was the bloodiest battle
of the war.
PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION.  The  Union Player should aim to deploy his  units  to
cover  the  roads  leading to Rossville and  McPhersons  Gap.
Thomas'  corps will move towards Kelly's Farm and Brotherton.
You  should position the army HQ subordinate divisions  south
of  Brotherton. Once this sector is organised, you  may  ride
north  and  adjust  Thomas' divisions.  This  is  a  confused
battle,  care must be taken to ensure that gaps large  enough
to allow an enemy penetration do not exist in your lines. The
Rebels  need  to  break your line to win. A stubborn  defence
will make the price too high.
CONFEDERATE. During the first day many confused clashes  will
result. As the South's Commander, you should try to keep  the
North  off  balance  while planning  for  tomorrow's  attack.
During  the night briefing (first AM turn, Day 2) you  should
issue  orders to implement your plan. This is the  only  time
when   communications  are  possible   to   all   commanders.
Longstreet  is your best commander, using him wisely  is  the
key   to  success.  Remember,  piecemeal  attacks  by  single
divisions are a good way to lose lives, and the game.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  Bragg  appointed Leonidas Polk to command  the  South's
Right   Wing   (represented  by  Polk's  large  corps).   His
performance in this role was sluggish at best! An alternative
choice  would  have  been  D.  H.  Hill;  a  resourceful  and
experienced  leader. To give Daniel Hill his  chance,  change
Polk's  HQ  as  follows;  ID = D.  H.  Hill,  Movement  =  5,
Leadership = 5, Staff = 5.
(2).  Thomas had effective control of more units during  this
battle than Rosecrans. For a change in perspective we can put
the  Union Player in Thomas' shoes by swapping Thomas'  Corps
H.  Q.  name, position, arrival, movement, leadership,  staff
and  troop  strength values with those in the  Army  HQ,  and
giving the First Corps defensive orders, with an objective of
Viniard (10). Also all divisions with a corps assignment of 0
will  need a value of 6, those with 6 must be switched to  0.
These changes essentially put you in command of Thomas' Corps
with Rosecrans as a subordinate corps commander.

CHATTANOOGA (MISSIONARY RIDGE)
November 23rd-25th, 1863
Holding  Missionary  Ridge during the siege  of  Chattanooga,
Bragg  had  extremely strong position. Grant planned  to  use
Thomas'  four divisions in a holding action on the  plain  in
front  while  Sherman,  who had just made  a  devious  detour
through  the mountains with four divisions, attacked  Bragg's
right  flank  along the ridge. Hooker was to  attack  Lookout
Mountain on the left with three divisions and Howard held two
divisions   in  reserve.  Bragg  was  defending  with   seven
divisions,  with  Cleburne  holding  the  right   flank   and
Stevenson on Lookout Mountain.
On  23rd November, Thomas was ordered to move out of the city
and take up a position half-way across the plain. Thomas' men
had  heard through the grapevine that Grant had doubts  about
their  morale  after  Chickamauga  and  were  on  their  best
behaviour.  They marched out with the precision of  a  review
and  the Confederate outposts on Orchard Knob and Bushy  Knob
were  enjoying the show when suddenly, the trumpets blew  and
they were swamped in a rush of soldiers.
On 24th, Sherman attacked smoothly on Bragg's right, brushing
aside all opposition, until he held the high ground. In  late
afternoon,  contemplating the next  day's  attack  along  the
ridge,  he suddenly realised that he wasn't on the  ridge  at
all. He had been tricked by the unfamiliar terrain and he was
on  an  isolated hill, separated from the main ridge. He  dug
in,  realising  that he had everything to  do  again  on  the
morrow.
Meanwhile, Hooker had been attacking Lookout Mountain. On the
steep and rocky terrain the two Confederate brigades put up a
good showing but against the pressure of three divisions they
could  only  fight a delaying action. During the  night  they
were  pulled back to Missionary Ridge by Bragg who felt  that
they  would  be  more use in the defence  there.  Thomas  did
nothing this day.
On  25th,  virtually nothing went as Grant  planned.  In  the
early  morning the American flag could be seen flying on  the
summit  of Lookout Mountain and Grant waited confidently  for
Hooker  to  advance on Rossville and Bragg's  left  wing.  He
waited  some  time  however, for the  terrain  was  extremely
difficult  and  there was a delay of over  four  hours  while
Hooker got into position.
Sherman, at the other end of the line, had run into  a  wall.
Cleburne's  single  division held off  attacks  by  Sherman's
four.  Grant  sent Howard's two divisions over  to  help  and
Cleburne drove them off too. Sherman attacked repeatedly  and
with   vigour  but  he  simply  could  not  budge   Cleburne,
entrenched on the high ground.
At  3.30  pm  with Hooker in position at one end and  Sherman
stalled  at  the  other  Grant looked doubtfully  at  Bragg's
triple  line  of  entrenchments, at the base  of  the  ridge,
midway up, and on the crest, and ordered Thomas to take those
at the base. Thomas' men were still annoyed that their morale
might be called into question and they took the trenches at a
rush.
Once  there,  however,  they  found  themselves  subject   to
plunging  fire from the trenches above. They could  not  stay
there, only go back or forward. They elected to go forward. A
wild spirit caught hold of them and the entire four divisions
charged  up the steep slope. It couldn't really be done  but,
aided by Bragg's poor siting of his entrenchments which  left
large  sections of the hill in defilade, they swept over  the
summit and the Confederate line broke and scattered.
Thomas' men had proved to everyone's satisfaction that  their
morale  was as good as ever. Total casualties were  5824  for
the North and 6667 for the South, including 4146 captured  or
missing.  Years later, someone remarked to Grant  that  Bragg
must  have  thought  his position impregnable.  Grant  smiled
wryly. "Well" he said, "it was impregnable."
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  The  pontoon bridge at Brown's Ferry was  destroyed  by
floods   before  P.  J.  Osterhaus'  division  could   cross,
consequently  this  division fought with Hooker  rather  than
with  Sherman as originally intended. Assume the bridge held.
Change  the  corps  assignment of Osterhaus'  division  to  8
(Sherman) and re-position his brigades (81 and 82) along  the
road to Shermans Bridge. Change the division objectives to 22
and 18 and the brigade objectives to 22.
(2). Prior to the battle Sherman issued orders for Hooker  to
move  north  across  Browns  Ferry and  through  Chattanooga,
rather  than fight his way over Lookout Mountain  and  across
Chattanooga  Creek in order to reach Missionary  Ridge.  This
plan  was  also thwarted by the destruction of Browns  Ferry.
Assume it could be accomplished. Position Hooker's corps  and
brigades   in   Chattanooga,  change  corps  and   divisional
objectives to 5 and 6 and brigade objectives to 5.
PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION. You are in an excellent position to carry out a double
envelopment  of  Missionary Ridge and  thereby  minimise  the
casualties  incurred during the final assault  on  the  Rebel
breastworks.  Wait until one or preferably  both  flanks  are
turned before loosing Thomas' Corps for the knockout blow  in
the centre.
CONFEDERATE.  The  South  is outnumbered  and  must  conserve
forces  whenever possible. Give ground wherever necessary  on
Lookout  Mountain,  and try to re-deploy back  to  Missionary
Ridge  by  the  morning of Day 2. A balance  must  be  struck
between holding the northern flank and weakening the centre.
