DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR
Strategic Studies Group (SSG)
TUTORIAL (VOL II)

1. GETTING THE GAME TO RUN
(a).  System  Requirements. This  program  requires  an  IBM
PC/XT/AT  or PS/2, a Tandy or other IBM compatible computer,
with  512K  of  memory. The program supports  the  following
graphics cards - EGA, CGA, MCGA, VGA, Hercules and uses  the
16  colour version of Tandy CGA. The program disk  does  not
include DOS and requires IBM/MS-DOS Version 2.1 or higher to
run.
(b).  Backup and Hard Disk Installation. The game disks  are
not  copy  protected.  Floppy  disk  users  should  use  the
standard DOS commands to copy the disks before use.  Do  not
use the original disks for game playing.
Hard Disk users should create a directory on their hard disk
and  copy  all  of the files from the floppy disks  to  that
directory.  All program files must be in the same  directory
for  the game to run. The path to this directory should  not
be longer than 26 characters.
(c).  Starting the Game. Boot your computer with DOS. Floppy
disk users should insert their copy of Disk One in drive  A:
and  type  db2  followed by (RET). Hard  Disk  users  should
change  to  the directory containing the program  files  and
type db2 followed by (RET).
Floppy disk users should note there is one scenario on  Disk
One  as  well as the program files. The other five scenarios
are on Disk Two. The tutorial will explain how to locate and
load  in the scenario of your choice. There is a readme file
on  Disk One. All the program and scenario files are on  the
one disk in the 3.5" version.
(e). System Set Up. The Set-Up menu allows you access to the
user options in the game. It is not necessary to worry about
it  while  you're learning the game. Use the arrow  keys  to
locate the <SET UP> line and type (RET).
Choosing  <EDIT> will allow you to customise  four  options.
Use the arrow keys to cycle through the options.
(i). Scrolling. The settings are 0-6. 0 = no scrolling;  1-6
= scrolling speed where 1 is slow and 6 is fast. The default
setting  is  3.  CGA users have only one  scroll  speed  (it
doesn't  matter  which setting you choose).  Type  (RET)  to
cycle  through the speed settings when the <SCROLLING>  line
is high-lighted. Type (ESC/DEL) to recover the menu window.
(ii). DEL = ESC. The default settings in the game allow  the
DEL  key to substitute for the ESC key. If you dislike  this
option, type (RET) to disable it.
(iii). Sound. This toggles the sound effects in the game  to
`on' or `off'.
(iv).   Auto-Save.  Setting  this  option   to   `on'   will
automatically save the game as soon as <RUN 5> is  selected.
Only  one file is maintained and it is overwritten each turn
keeping  the  last turn always available. This file  can  be
loaded  using  the  <LOAD AUTO> command  in  the  Save  Game
Utility.
Choosing <SAVE> will save your choices to disk in a  special
file.
Choosing  <LOAD>  will load the current  options  from  that
file, if it exists.
The  <PATH> command sets the DOS path for all DOS operations
like  loading  and  saving files. It  is  restricted  to  26
characters in length. When specifying drive names  you  must
include the colon (:) as part of the path.
(f).  Video Trouble Shooting. EGA and VGA systems will start
up  with  our  "full-map"  graphic routines.  Other  graphic
boards use our standard graphic routines. The program  makes
its best guess at your computer's video mode and should run.
In the unlikely event that the program gets it wrong you can
use  a  command  line switch to force the program  into  the
appropriate    video    mode.   This    takes    the    form
(db2)(space)(n)(RET) where n is a single character; i.e. c =
CGA, e = EGA, t = Tandy, m = MCGA, h = Hercules, v = VGA and
f  = switch off "full-map" graphics. The only reason EGA/VGA
users  would  have  to switch off "full-map"  graphics  (and
instead  use  standard  graphics) is for  rapid  testing  of
original  scenarios or the initial creation of  an  original
game  map as described in the WarPaint÷ chapter of the  Game
Manual.
(g).  DOS Details. In the real world of DOS, save game files
are  maintained  with the name DF_nnn.DXG  where  nnn  is  a
number between 001 and 050. Scenario files have the scenario
name  followed  by  a .DFX suffix. You can  use  normal  DOS
commands  to  delete or copy these files if  necessary,  but
since  you  can  save over existing files it should  not  be
necessary  to  use  DOS often. In addition,  the  "full-map"
graphic routines use an additional file with the same prefix
as the game file and a .LBM suffix. Again, see the WarPaint÷
chapter in the Game Manual.

2. LEARNING TO PLAY THE GAME
Following  hard  upon the Union disaster at Chancellorsville
in  May  of  1863, Robert E. Lee took the Army  of  Northern
Virginia  north  into Pennsylvania, into the  heart  of  the
Union.  The purpose of this hastily organised offensive  was
no  less  than  the salvation of the Confederacy.  With  her
coastline  tightly blockaded, most of her ports in  northern
hands  and  her economy verging on disintegration, President
Davis   was  desperate  for  some  relief.  This  unexpected
opportunity  to  put  political  pressure  on  Lincoln,   to
encourage  European  powers to grant diplomatic  recognition
and  to follow up on a supposedly demoralised army could not
be let go to waste.
President Lincoln viewed the Confederate drive with concern,
ever  pre-occupied  with  the security  of  his  capital  at
Washington.  The Army of the Potomac, eager to  reverse  the
seemingly endless string of defeats it had suffered and with
George  Gordon Meade now commanding, was sent in pursuit  of
their Southern foe.
On  the morning of July 1st, just a little north-west of the
small,  rural township of Gettysburg, the brigades of  Henry
Heth's division ran into a detachment of Union cavalry under
the  command  of  John  Buford. The battle  was  joined  and
throughout  the  day troops from both armies  poured  in  to
reinforce  the  escalating struggle.  Commanding  the  Union
forces  on this day was Maj-Gen John F. Reynolds; Meade  did
not arrive on the battlefield until July 2nd.
You  are  invited, in this tutorial, to take on the role  of
John  Reynolds. You will command those elements of the  Army
of  the Potomac which became available throughout the  first
day  and you will be expected to blunt the Confederate drive
on  or about the historic Cemetery Hill. Your computer  will
command the Rebels.
As well as this manual, you'll need to have the data card in
front of you.

(a). Starting Up
Start  up  your computer using the procedure  given  on  the
start  side of the menu card. Menu A (Start Up Menu) appears
to  the  right of the title page. As is the case with  every
menu  in  the  game, you use the arrow keys to  locate  your
choice  from the menu and then type (RET) to select it.  IBM
users  may  alternatively use a function key to  locate  and
select a menu item. The <SET-UP> line in Menu A is the third
line in the menu; therefore f3 will select it. Similarly, f4
will select the <GOTO DOS> line.
If  you select the wrong menu, don't worry. Apple II and IBM
users  type (ESC) to go back to the previous menu;  C-64/128
users type (f1). IBM and Apple II users should note that the
(DEL) key will serve as the (ESC) key in most situations.
IBM  users can turn the sound on/off through Menu 12 of  the
Game Routines. Apple II and C-64 users should type Cntl  (S)
to turn on/off the sound. Apple II and C-64 users with a B&W
monitor should type Cntl (B).

(b). Selecting the Gettysburg Day 1 Scenario
Before  we  can start play, we have to select the Gettysburg
Day  1 scenario, tell the computer that we will control  the
North forces and decide which game options we wish to use.
Use  either  arrow key to locate the <GAME>  line  and  type
(RET) to go to Menu B (Location Select). At this point,  IBM
owners using 5.25" floppy disks should remove Disk One  from
the drive and replace it with Disk Two. Apple II owners with
one disk drive should remove the game disk, turn it over and
put it back in the drive.
Use  an  arrow  key to locate the <SCENARIO> line  and  type
(RET) to go to Menu C (Scenario Menu).
Use an arrow key to locate the <GETTY 1> line and type (RET)
to go to Menu E (Edit Utility). The scenario briefing screen
is  displayed to the left of the menu window. IBM users must
select  the  <LOAD GAME> line and then position  the  cursor
over the <Gettysburg Day 1> line and type (RET).
Use an arrow key to locate the <EDIT> line and type (RET) to
go  to  Menu N (Game Options). There are two (IBM) or  three
(Apple  II  and C-64) options available when  you  play  the
game.
(i). Exposed. When the exposed flag is set, all units on the
map will be visible at all times. If the exposed flag is not
set,  only  currently sighted units will be visible  on  the
battlefield.
(ii).  Enhanced (Apple II and C-64 Only). When the  enhanced
flag  is  set,  computer controlled  forces  will  be  given
certain  bonuses.  For  example, unit size,  leadership  and
staff ratings may be increased.
(iii).  Radio.  When the radio flag is set,  you  will  have
automatic communications with every unit in your command. If
the  radio  flag  is  not  set, only  those  units  directly
attached to the army HQ and within communications range  can
be given orders.
For tutorial purposes, we will choose to set the exposed and
radio flags but leave the enhanced flag alone. Position  the
cursor on the <EXPOSED> line and type (RET). The cursor will
return  automatically to the <CONTINUE> line. Select <RADIO>
in the same way. Select <CONTINUE> to go to Menu F (Handicap
Utility).  An Options in Effect box has appeared  below  the
menu  window showing that the exposed and radio  flags  have
been set.
Since  this  is  only a tutorial, we will give  ourselves  a
break. The handicaps below the <NO EFFECT> line benefit  the
South,  those  above  benefit the North.  The  effect  of  a
handicap is to modify the victory point awards, it does  not
affect  the  artificial intelligence nor the composition  of
the  forces. Note that the handicap structure for IBM  users
asks  you  to  select a veteran, normal or novice  opponent.
Select  a  novice.  AII/C64 users select the  <MAJOR>  north
line.
You  have  been processed through to Menu G (Player Select).
Locate the <NORTH> line and type (RET). The cursor has  been
thrown into the briefing screen and you have the opportunity
to  change  the  commanders' names. Do  this  if  you  wish,
otherwise  type  (RET) until you get back to  Menu  E  (Edit
Utility).
Have  a last look at the briefing screen and you'll see  the
North  has  a  major handicap advantage (IBM users  will  be
opposed  by  a  novice computer general which is  an  unfair
description of Lee?), the South forces will be  run  by  the
computer and the exposed flag is set.
Use  an arrow key to locate the <START> line and type  (RET)
to go to Menu H (Game Master).
That's  the preliminaries over with. We're just about  ready
to play.
Turn your menu card over to the game side.

(c). The First Turn
This  tutorial is a brief introduction as to  how  the  game
plays.  It is not intended to be a description of everything
that  can  happen. The Game Manual describes in  detail  the
full  use  of each menu. Once you have some experience  with
the  game menus, we recommend you read Chapter 5 in the Game
Manual   for  an  explanation  of  the  major  game  systems
controlled by the computer.
Back  to  Menu H. A current turn briefing appears above  the
menu window. The date is July 1st, 1863, it is 9 am and this
is  the  first of the fourteen turns in the game. Below  the
menu  window you can see it is daylight and the  weather  is
clear.
In  the  centre  of  the  map is  the  town  of  Gettysburg.
Reynolds'  head-quarters (that's you) is  stationed  in  the
middle of town.
The  <SOUTH>  and  <RUN  5> lines  in  the  menu  have  been
overprinted with a solid bar to show that you cannot  access
them.  The  solid bar will disappear from the <RUN  5>  line
after  the <NORTH> line has been accessed. This is to  guard
against  accidentally selecting <RUN 5> before issuing  your
orders.  The <SOUTH> line will always be overprinted  during
the  game. The computer does not want you to see what it  is
doing!
Locate the <NORTH> line and type (RET). This brings up  Menu
2  (Operations  Master). Your choices here  are  <PERSONAL>,
<COMMAND>,  <ORDER>, <RESIGN> or <OPTIONS>, <MAP  WALK>  and
<ROSTER> (IBM Only).
The  map  has  not changed, just the information  above  and
below the menu window. Above the menu window you can see the
army I.D. Below the menu window you are given a casualty and
victory point summary. The small number of casualties  shown
are  stragglers from those brigades which have  been  force-
marching  since dawn. The VPs show what your score would  be
if the game was to end at this moment.
The  <PERSONAL>, <COMMAND> and <ORDER> lines are  the  menus
you  use  to  give orders to your forces, the <RESIGN>  line
ends the game immediately and the <MAP WALK> line allows you
to  review  your  forces, enemy forces, the battlefield  and
objectives.  The <ROSTER> line displays your complete  Order
of Battle.

(d). Reviewing Your Forces
Before  issuing  orders we'll examine the  battlefield,  the
objectives and the enemy forces.
Select  the <MAP WALK> line to go to Menu 3. The screen  has
centred  on  a hollow, flashing cursor. Use the arrow  keys,
the  I,  J, K and M or the 1-6 keys to move the cursor  over
the  map.  The map will scroll once the cursor  reaches  the
edge. Type (0) to centre the screen on the cursor.
At the very bottom of the information panel, you will see  a
three-part icon display. From left to right this  shows  you
the  type of terrain in the hex, which sections of  the  map
are  in  use  for this scenario together with  the  relative
position of the cursor and which side currently controls the
hex.  The name of the terrain type appears immediately above
the display.
Move  the  cursor to Pitzer School. It is in  the  southeast
corner  of the map. IBM owners can use the f1 - f9  keys  to
scroll  the  map in large increments. Pitzer  School  is  an
objective. Its name appears above the terrain type name  and
its victory point details are described.
Move  the  cursor to any one of the Confederate brigades  in
the  northwest sector of the battlefield. The icons  at  the
top  of  the  information panel tell you it is  an  infantry
brigade  while  below that you are told  its  formation  and
condition.  Note  that  one  of  the  four  brigades  is  an
artillery formation.
Type  (RET)  to bring up the map walk menu. Select  <ROADS>;
all  roads are removed from the map. Type (RET) to bring  up
the  menu  again  then select <ROADS> to  replace  the  road
network.
<CONTROL> allows you to see which side controls a particular
hex. <CLEAR> removes all units on the map so you can see the
terrain underneath.
Move the cursor to the Union brigade two hexes south-east of
the   northernmost  Confederate  brigade.  This  is  Devin's
cavalry   brigade  from  Buford's  cavalry   division.   The
information  provided  is  mostly  self  explanatory;   more
details are available in Chapter 5 of the Game Manual.

(e). Operations
Go  back  to Menu 2. The <PERSONAL> line is the place  where
you must decide where to put your army HQ and how personally
involved  you  want  to get in the battle. Select<PERSONAL>.
Below  the  menu  window  you will  see  that  your  current
condition is OK. In the battle you can get captured, wounded
or even killed!
Select  <PROFILE> and you will be presented  with  the  four
profiles  you  may choose from. You may change your  profile
each  turn. Your profile will not change from turn  to  turn
unless  you enter this menu and change it. You always  begin
with  the  default value set to <SENSIBLE>. The  words  here
mean  pretty  much  what they say. Heroic will  inspire  all
troops  within four hexes of your position while  increasing
the  likelihood of a nasty accident. Cautious will keep  you
safe  and  sound  but  the effect  on  your  men  may  prove
disastrous.  For  this  tutorial,  keep  your   profile   on
<SENSIBLE>. Historically, Reynolds assumed a heroic  profile
on this day. At the end of it, he was dead!
Select  <MOVE HQ>. This is the mechanism by which  you  move
your  HQ around the map. <STAND> tells the army HQ to remain
exactly where it is. <CURSOR> gives you access to the cursor
so  that you can use the I,J,K,M keys, the arrow keys or the
1-6  keys  to  move your HQ to the location of your  choice.
Note  that  you  will  not be allowed  to  select  an  enemy
controlled hex as your destination.
<CONTROL> directs the army HQ to move as quickly as possible
to  a  friendly corps HQ for the purpose of placing it under
direct command. <OBJECTIVE> allows you chose an objective as
the destination for the army HQ, using either the arrow keys
or the name routine.
For the moment, leave your HQ in Gettysburg.
Now  that the personal matters have been taken care of, it's
time  to  give  orders to your subordinates.  Type  (ESC/f1)
until you get back to Menu 2 and then select <COMMAND>.  The
<COMMAND>  line  gives  you  access  to  all  your  division
commanders presently on the battlefield. There is  only  one
of  them at the moment; Buford's cavalry division. Note that
when  the radio flag is set all corps commanders, and  their
icons, are removed from the game.
Buford's defensive order is to hold Herr Tavern. Type  (RET)
to  bring up Buford's order menu. We will keep Buford on the
defensive  but move his defensive position from Herr  Tavern
back to the McPherson house. Select the <DEFENSIVE> line and
you  will  see the data for the Herr Tavern objective.  It's
#23 of 23. McPherson is #22. Tap the left arrow key once  or
the  right  arrow key 23 times. You can also  use  the  Name
routine  to find an objective. Type (n) then (mcp). As  soon
as  the routine recognises an exclusive group of letters, it
will jump to that objective.
Type  (RET)  again  to  get  back to  the  Command  Display.
Buford's  defensive order is now centred  on  the  McPherson
house.
Type  (ESC/f1) until you get back to Menu 2 and then  select
<ORDER>.  The <ORDER> line gives access to all the  brigades
currently on the map. There are just 2 at the moment.
Each brigade is identified by a 3 (IBM 9) character ID;  the
Order of Battle details in Part 2 of this booklet will  tell
you   each  brigade  commander's  full  name.  For  example,
Gamble's  brigade (Gam) is cavalry, it belongs  to  Buford's
division, it is in skirmish formation, it has 1600 men and 6
guns,  its  cohesion rating is excellent and its  leadership
and experience ratings are fair. Use the arrow keys to cycle
through the two brigades so far on the battlefield.
Locate Devin's cavalry brigade (Dev). Type (RET) to bring up
the brigade order menu. Just to be on the safe side, we will
order  Devin to fall back. Use the arrow keys to select  the
<WITHDRAW>  line  and type (RET). Likewise,  order  Gamble's
cavalry brigade (Gam) to withdraw.
We  are  now  ready to end the turn. Go back to menu  H  and
select  <RUN  5>.  Battle reports are  presented  one  after
another and you should tap the <SPACE> bar to move on to the
next  report. A full explanation of the combat mechanics  is
given  in  Chapter  5 of the game Manual. Basically,  firing
units  are shown as arrows pointing in the direction of  the
target  unit.  Once the battles are over, the computer  will
begin  moving troops. If the exposed flag had not been  set,
only those units visible to each other would have been seen.

(f). What to Do Next
Read  the scenario notes for this battle in Part 2. You must
try  to  delay  the Rebs as long as possible before  falling
back  to Cemetery Hill. Experiment with the order menus.  If
you're  uncertain  about what to do, accept  the  computer's
advice and do not change the order. Refer to Chapters 4  and
5 of the Game Manual when necessary.
