ZORK 1

This game is rather capricious, involving random elements that can kill
you or get the game into an unsolvable state. Wise players (as well as,
or maybe especially, the unwise) are advised to save the game regularly,
such as after putting each treasure in the trophy case and before
dangerous or randomized actions.


Above Ground

Open the mailbox. Get the leaflet and read it, then drop it. Go north
twice to a Forest Path location and climb the tree. Get the egg from the
nest and go back down. Try to open the egg, but you'll find that you
can't do it. (This action is essential, otherwise the Thief won't open
the egg for you later.) Go south and east to Behind House. Open the
window and enter the house.

Get the sack and bottle. Open the sack and you will see it contains a
lunch and a clove of garlic. You can either eat the lunch and drink the
water, or keep them as an alternate solution for a later puzzle. Either
way, make sure you hang on to the garlic and the sack itself. Go west to
the Living Room. Get the sword and lantern. Move the rug and open the
trap door. Turn on the lamp. Go down into the Great Underground Empire.

For Your Amusement: Eat the garlic.


Regarding the Thief

At any point underground, the Thief may come by and steal treasures
directly from you, or he may steal any item you have seen from any room
while you are not present. There is a much higher chance he will steal
treasures than non-valuable objects, and he may later drop something
non-valuable elsewhere. If you lose a treasure this way, don't worry;
you'll get it back near the end of the game.

The Thief is difficult to defeat in a fight. If he is already in a room
when you enter, it is usually a good idea to leave immediately.
Alternatively, giving him a treasure will distract him from attacking
you for one turn. You become a better match as you gain points, so don't
purposely attack him until near the end of the game. The nasty knife
from the Attic is a slightly better weapon against the Thief than the
sword is. (I didn't include picking up the knife in the "Above Ground"
section for weight capacity reasons.)


The Cellar Area and Maze

Drop the egg here in the Cellar so the Thief can find it and open it.
You may wish to save your game here, as the battle with the troll stands
a good chance of killing you. Go north. Attack the troll with the sword.
Repeat. Restore as necessary. When you have succeeded in killing the
troll, drop the sword (I know, I know, but it's not really necessary,
and inventory limits are annoying in this game), save the game again,
and go west to enter the Maze.

Go west, west, and up. Save here so that you can restore if the Thief
steals the key from you before you can use it. Get the bag of coins and
the skeleton key. (If the game tells you they are too heavy "especially
in light of your condition," you were wounded in the fight with the
troll. Diagnose and wait until your wounds are healed. One wait command
passes three turns.) Go southwest, east, south, and southeast.

Here, you have a choice of two solutions to deal with the Cyclops: 1.
say "Odysseus" to scare him away (my preferred solution because it opens
a direct path between here and the house), or 2. give him the lunch,
then open the bottle and give him the water.

If you said "Odysseus", you can now exit the room through the destroyed
wall; go east twice and you'll be back in the Living Room. If you gave
the Cyclops the lunch and water, you'll need to exit the Maze another
way and make your way back to the house. Check your inventory and see if
you still have the skeleton key. If not, restore and try again. If so,
save the game and go northwest, south, west, up, west, southwest, and
northeast. Unlock the grating with the skeleton key, open it, and go up;
then go east, south, and west three times.

Either way, now that you have found another exit from the Great
Underground Empire besides the chimney, the trap door in the Living Room
will not close behind you. Open the trophy case and put the coins in it.
Drop the key and bottle here, as well as the lunch if you didn't use it
(or you can eat it now and drink the water too, if you like). Keep hold
of the brown sack itself, since it's a container, as well as the garlic.

Open the trap door again and go down. Go south, then east to the
Gallery. Get the painting, then go west, north, and up to the Living
Room and put it in the trophy case.

For Your Amusement: Go down the chimney from the Kitchen. Give various
things to the troll, especially the nasty knife from the Attic. Knock
the troll unconscious (save a game so you can retry the battle until you
accomplish this) and take his axe, then return it to him after he wakes
up. Say hello to, listen to, and take the troll and Cyclops. Damage the
painting (for example, by cutting or burning it).


The Dam and Reservoir

Go down the trap door to the Cellar. Go north, then east three times to
the Loud Room. Type echo. Get the platinum bar. Go west, west, west,
south, and up to the Living Room and put it in the trophy case. (This is
the easier solution to this puzzle, requiring the fewest moves, but you
can also get the bar by emptying the Reservoir, closing the dam gates,
and coming back here to get it while the Reservoir fills up again. See
the next moves if that solution interests you.)

Go down, north, east 3 times, up, east, and north to Dam Lobby. Get the
matchbook. Go north or east to Maintenance Room. Get the wrench and
screwdriver. Push the yellow button. Go south twice back to the dam and
turn the bolt with the wrench. Drop the wrench. Go west to Reservoir
South and wait two turns until the reservoir empties ("The water level
is now quite low here..."). Go north to Reservoir and get the trunk of
jewels. Go south, southwest, southwest, west, south, up to the Living
Room and put it in the trophy case. Return to the Reservoir (down,
north, east, north, northeast, and north). Go north again to Reservoir
North and get the air pump. Go north again to the Atlantis Room and get
the crystal trident. Go up, north, north, west, and then down from the
Slide Room to the Cellar. Go up and put the trident in the case.

For Your Amusement: Read the matchbook.


The Temple Area

Go east to the Kitchen, then up to the Attic and get the rope. Go back
down, west, and down into the Cellar. Go north, east, east, southeast,
and east to the Dome Room. Tie the rope to the railing and go down to
the Torch Room. Get the torch and turn off your lamp. Go south to the
Temple and drop everything but the torch.

Save a game here, since the ivory torch is a treasure as well as a light
source and there's a chance that the Thief will come by and steal it
from you, leaving you in the dark and likely to be eaten by a grue. It's
easier to restore to this point than to deal with making your way back
to where you were when you died. (You may also wish to save every ten or
twenty moves until you pick up the lamp again.)

Go east to the Egyptian Room and get the coffin. Open it and take the
sceptre. Go west, then south to the Altar. Ignore the candles and book
for now and pray at the altar. You will be teleported to a Forest
location. Go east, south, east, in to the house, and west to the Living
Room. Put the coffin and sceptre in the trophy case.

Return down, north, east, east, southeast, east, down, south to the
Temple, where you dropped everything, and get the matchbook and bell.
Open the matchbook. Go south to the Altar. Get the candles and black
book. Put out the candles. Check inventory and be sure you're carrying
nothing but the book, candles, bell, matchbook, and torch. Go down twice
to Entrance to Hades. Ring the bell. You will drop both it and the
candles. Get the candles, light a match, light the candles, then read
the book. Put out the candles. Drop the book.

Go south to the Land of the Dead and get the skull. Go north, up, north
three times, west, west, south, and up to the Living Room. Put the skull
in the trophy case. Get the sceptre again while you are here. Return
down, north, east, east, southeast, east, down, south to the Temple and
collect all your belongings. You should have the air pump, screwdriver,
lantern, sack with garlic, sceptre, candles, matchbook, and torch; if
any of the non-valuables is missing, restore.

For Your Amusement: Read the black book at the Altar. Light the candles
with the torch. Burn the black book. Try something naughty with the
bodies in Hades.


Old Man River

From the Temple, go south, down, north, north, north, east, up, east,
east to Dam Base. Inflate the pile of plastic with the air pump. Drop
the pump. Read the label (notice that the boat is made of "thin"
plastic), then drop it. Put the screwdriver and sceptre in the sack;
they are sharp and will puncture the boat it if you board while carrying
them. Get in the boat and launch. Wait four turns while the river
carries you downstream on the Frigid River.

When you see the red buoy, get it and go east to Sandy Beach to land.
Stand up out of the boat. Open the buoy, take the emerald, and drop the
buoy. Get the shovel. Go northeast to Sandy Cave and dig in the sand
with the shovel four times. Drop the shovel and take the scarab. Go
southwest back to Sandy Beach.

If you still have the sceptre, go south twice to Aragain Falls. Wave the
sceptre. Go west twice across the rainbow. You're carrying too much
weight to get the pot of gold at the moment, so go southwest, up, up,
northwest, west, enter the house, and go west to the Living Room.

If the Thief stole the sceptre from you while you were underground, go
west to the Sandy Beach and board the boat again; launch and immediately
go west to land. Stand, then go north, west five times, south, and up.
Put the scarab, emerald, and sceptre (if you have it) in the trophy
case.

If you don't have the sceptre, skip to the next section. Otherwise, go
back for the pot of gold by going east four times, down, down, north to
End of Rainbow. (If the pot of gold is gone, then the Thief has stolen
it; the End of Rainbow location is technically "underground".) Get the
pot and return southwest, up, up, northwest, west, west, west and put it
in the case too.

For Your Amusement: Continue digging in the sand after you find the
scarab. (save first) Wave the sceptre while standing on the rainbow.
(save first)


The Coal Mine

Take the garlic out of the sack and carry it normally. From the Living
Room, go down, north, east twice, and south twice to the south Mirror
Room. Touch the mirror and you will be transported to the north Mirror
Room (though this may not be immediately apparent). Go north, west,
north, west, and north to the Bat Room. (The garlic you are holding
repels the vampire bat.) Get the jade figurine. Go east to the Shaft
Room. Put the torch and screwdriver in the basket. (If the Thief has
stolen the torch, put in the candles; don't light them yet.)

Turn on your lamp if it's not already on. Go north, then down to the Gas
Room. Get the bracelet. Go east, northeast, southeast, southwest, and
down twice to Ladder Bottom. Go south and get the coal. Go north, then
up twice back into Coal Mine. Go north, east, south, and north through
the mine, then up and south to the Shaft Room. Put the coal in the
basket. If you have candles instead of the torch, light a match, light
the candles, then put them back in the basket.

Lower the basket. Retrace your steps to the bottom of the ladder: north,
down, east, northeast, southeast, southwest, down, down. Go west to the
Timber Room, drop everything, and then west again. In the Drafty Room,
get the coal, screwdriver, and torch (or candles) from the basket and go
south. Open the machine, put the coal inside, and close it again. Turn
the switch with the screwdriver. Open the machine and get the diamond.
Drop the screwdriver.

Go north and put the torch (or candles) and diamond in the basket. Go
east, pick up your items (except the timber), and go back through the
coal mine to the Shaft Room: east, up, up, north, east, south, north,
up, south. Raise the basket. Take the diamond and torch (if you used the
candles, you can leave them here and drop the matchbook). Go west,
south, east, and south, then down to the Cellar. Go up to the Living
Room and put the torch, diamond, bracelet, and figurine in the trophy
case. You can drop the garlic.

For Your Amusement: Enter the Gas Room with an open flame, such as the
torch or candles.


The Treasure Room and the Barrow

Go east and up to the Attic and pick up the nasty-looking knife. Return
down and west to the Living Room. If you used the "Odysseus" solution to
the Cyclops puzzle, go west twice from the Living Room to the Cyclops
Room. If not, go down to the Cellar, north and west into the Maze, then
west, west, up, southwest, east, south, southeast.

Once in the Cyclops Room, save the game (because the Thief can
definitely still kill you) and go up to the Treasure Room. If by chance
the Thief is not there, leave and return until he appears. Attack the
Thief with the nasty knife. Repeat. When you have killed him, take the
egg and chalice and any other treasures that may be here. You can leave
the stiletto.

Go down to the Cyclops Room and then east twice to the Living Room (or
return through the Maze: northwest, south, down, south, north, east,
south, up). Get the canary from the egg. Put the chalice and egg (and
any other treasures you may have recovered) in the case. Turn off the
lamp.

Leave the house by going east twice to Behind House, and go north twice
into the forest. Wind the canary. Get the brass bauble. Return south and
east to Behind House, go west twice to the Living Room, and put the
canary and bauble in the case.

If the Thief stole the sceptre from you or you had to give it to him,
you're still lacking the pot of gold. Go east four times, down, down,
north. Raise or wave the sceptre and pick up the pot of gold. Return
southwest, up, up, northwest, west, west, west and put it and the
sceptre in the case.

Once you have all the treasures ("An almost inaudible voice whispers in
your ear..."), look at the trophy case, and you will find a map has
appeared. Take it and look at it. Go east twice, then south and west to
West of House. Go southwest down the "secret path" which has appeared,
and enter the Stone Barrow to the west.

Congratulations, you're now in Zork II!

For Your Amusement: Say hello to, listen to, and take the Thief.

For Your Amusement at various times: Swear at Zork. Cut something with
the knife or sword. Light something on fire (such as the pile of
leaves), then pour water on it from the bottle. Get killed after praying
at the altar, then wait or score while a spirit. Walk around the house
or in the forest. Try these commands: Zork; xyzzy or plugh; chomp; win;
lose; mumble or sigh; repent; yell or scream; bite myself; take myself;
find, count, listen to, what is, and smell various things (house, hands,
teeth, myself, candles, leaves, matches…).