BRUCE LEE(TM)

DATASOFT(R)


STRATEGY

An opulent, mysterious, and perilous fortress is the setting as Bruce Lee 
seeks to claim infinite wealth and the secret of immortality from the 
wizard who dwells within.

You begin your search for the wizard at the entrance to his fortress. 
This chamber, and each chamber here, is sealed off from the other rooms. 
The only way to get from one room to the adjoining room is to jump up and 
take the lanterns which hang from the ceiling. When you get all the 
lanterns (or at least certain lanterns) for that room, the door opens. 
(Watch the edges of your screen so that you'll see when your exit is 
possible.) Hint: You must get all of the lanterns in the first three 
rooms in order to proceed. Then go to the middle room and look for the 
opening through which you can exit.

Throughout your search for the wizard, you are attacked by the ninja 
brandishing their BOKKEN sticks. Even more dangerous is the Yamo, who 
runs after you and delivers crushing kicks. Duck and run away to foil 
their attempts to harm you, then come back kicking and chopping - the 
Yamo can survive only three blows and the ninja can survive only two. 
Take as many lanterns and cover as much ground as you can before these 
foes reappear.

To get around each room, you can climb vines (up, down, or sideways), 
ride on waves of particles which change direction at random, leap from 
ledge to ledge, and jump down from a ledge without injury.

Hazards and traps await you in rooms close to the wizard's chamber. You 
must avoid electrical charges passing through gaps between ledges, PAN 
lights streaming across the floor, and exploding T'SUNG-LIN (bushes) 
appearing from nowhere.

When you finally reach the wizard, keep away from the fire balls 
streaming from his eyes. Press the button which destroys the wizard - and 
his fortunes are yours! Enjoy them, because your next foray into the 
fortress will be more difficult!


REQUIREMENTS

* Apple II(R) series computer
* Apple compatible disk drive
* TV or video monitor
* Joystick


GETTING STARTED

1. Turn off your computer. Connect a joystick.
2. Turn on the power to your TV or video monitor.
3. Insert the BRUCE LEE(TM) diskette with the label side up. Close the 
disk drive door
4. Turn on the computer. The program will load and run automatically. 
Leave the disk in the drive during game play.

NUMBER OF PLAYER is selected by pressing the 1 or 2 key.

In a ONE-PLAYER GAME, you are Bruce competing against the Yamo and ninja. 
You can take five falls before the game is over.

In a TWO-PLAYER GAME, you and another person take turns being Bruce, 
competing against the Yamo and ninja. As soon as you (Bruce) take a fall, 
the other player takes a turn as Bruce. The computer keeps track of each 
player's score.

BEGIN PLAY by pressing either joystick button.

PAUSE the game by pressing the SPACE BAR. To resume play, press a 
joystick button or press the SPACE BAR again.


JOYSTICK CONTROLS

RUN left and right by moving the joystick left and right.

KICK by pressing the joystick button while you are running. You will 
deliver a kick in that direction.

CHOP by pressing the joystick button while you are standing still. You 
will execute a chop in the direction you are facing.

LEAP to get from one ledge to another by moving the joystick up and to 
the left or right. You may find that Bruce will have to leap to avoid 
hazards along some passageways.

JUMP to take a lantern or to grab on to a vine.

CLIMB up a vine by positioning yourself under it, moving the joystick up, 
and holding it there until you reach the top. You can climb down the vine 
by pulling the joystick down and across it by moving the joystick left or 
right.

DUCK to avoid a blow from the Yamo or ninja by pulling the joystick down.


INDICATORS

At the top of the screen from left to right you will find: player "up", 
that player's score, top score for this session of play, and the number 
of falls in reserve before the game is over.


POINTS

Lantern                    125     Knocking out ninja          200
Chopping ninja or Yamo     100     Knocking out Yamo           450 
Kicking ninja or Yamo       75     Destroying wizard          3000
Entering new room         2000     Landing on ninja or Yamo     50


CREDITS

Programming by Richard Mirsky
Concept by Ron J. Fortier and Kelly Day
Computer graphics by Kelly Day
Documentation by Ingrid Holcomb

Apple is a registered trademark of Apple Computer Inc.


DATASOFT(R)

19808 Nordhoff Place, Chatsworth, CA 91311
Licensed by Ziv International
Bruce Lee(TM) designates a trademark of Linda Lee.
Datasoft(R) is a registered trademark of Datasoft Inc.
(C) 1984 Datasoft Inc. All rights reserved.

PRINTED IN USA
