ENHANCED BEGINNERS CAVE Author: Donald Brown and John Nelson.

This is John Nelson's updated version of the original Beginners Cave by
Donald Brown, offered on the expanded master by John Nelson and Jon
Heng. The adventure contains all the original content including monsters
rooms and items; it also contains various new rooms housing additional
monsters and treasures. In its original form, since it was written with
a more advanced version of the Eamon program (version 6.0 as opposed to
the original 4.0), it also accepts some abbreviations and contains some
general program upgrades not found in the original version of The
Beginners Cave.


Premise

As with The Beginners Cave, this is said to be a training area setup by
the Warlord and overseen by William Misslefire where new members of the
Guild of Free Adventurers may hone their skills and gather some small
treasures. As with other beginner areas (except in Eamon Deluxe),
characters who are too experienced will be barred from entering by the
Knight Marshal.


Walkthrough


1. As in the original Beginners Cave, head down the south corridor,
checking the various side chambers for monsters, companions and
treasures. There are two additional cells containing two new monsters to
encounter, plus another weapon to collect. 2. In particular note the
bottle in the first west chamber where the Hermit lives, since it is a
healing potion, and Be careful of the Mimic who lurks in one east
chamber disguised as a chest. It will come to life and attack you when
you approach, it is a hard battle though it does yield some treasure. 3.
After passing all the cells, continue south. To the west is a ruined
library with a magical book and a monster, the Slovobian book eater. Do
not read the book since it will turn you into a very short-lived fish,
but take it since it's a treasure item. 4. When you come to an area with
a rough door-shaped outline on the east wall, examine this to find a
secret door which leads to an altar where you can rescue Cynthia, the
daughter of a duke from an evil priest. 5. Continue east and down the
stairs, then head east once more and take the south corridor. Here you
will find further companions and monsters in rooms to the sides of the
passage, including the room where the pirates store their treasure and a
mummy's tomb with a not-so-valuable cat idol. At the south end the
passage forks, with two more passages splitting off east and west
leading to a couple more rooms containing monsters such as the Condor
guarding its golden egg, and two large chambers containing treasures and
further allies or enemies. 6. When you have fully explored all the
southern chambers, return to the main corridor east of the stairs and
head one east to a cave which is obviously near the seashore. 7. Examine
the funny-looking rock in the north wall to find a secret closet
containing a python and a ruby. 8. East the tunnel terminates in the
Pirate's Cove, where a pirate attacks you with the magical sword
Trollsfire. Slay him and take both the sword and the jewels he was
guarding. Trollsfire is a magic sword and has a special attack when its
name is spoken; however, unless you left some side passages unexplored,
you may have already run out of monsters to fight by this point in the
adventure. 9. Return along the central corridor, west then up the stairs
then north to the Main Hall, where Sam Slicker will pay for your
treasure items, and you'll also receive a reward of ten times your
charisma in gold for the safe return of Cynthia. Note that since all the
treasures from Don Brown's original cave are available plus many new
ones, this will also be a more rewarding excursion.