PURSUIT OF THE GRAF SPEE

1.0 INTRODUCTION

Pursuit of the Graf Spee is a strategic game that allows
the players to recreate the historic search for the German
pocket Battleship, Graf Spee in late 1939. This search
ultimately led to the Battle of the River Plate which sealed
the fate of the German warship. In the game, players will
control individual ships moving on a map of the South Atlantic.

1.1 Starting a game (DOS 3.2 or DOS 3.3)

To begin a game; boot your disk (Insert the disk in drive one
and turn on your computer) and the game will begin automatic
-ally. If you are using an Apple II with Pascal, You must use
your BASICS disk. If you are using an Apple III, you must first
go into Apple II Emulation mode.

1.2 Saving a Game

At the end of each turn the player(s) will be asked if they
wish to save the game in progress. If you choose to save the
game, you will need a scratch disk to store the data. The
scratch disk must be initialized for SSI use by following the
instructions included in the program. Once the game is saved,
you will be able to restart it from the point at which you
left off.

2.0 GENERAL DESCRIPTION

2.1 Parts Inventory

A. Box
B. Battle Manual
C. 5-1/4" Game Disk
D. Two Ship Data Cards

2.2 Definition Of Terms

2.2.1 Damage level - A percentage rating of the amount of
battle damage a ship has incurred. A value of 0% indicates
no damage while a value of 100% indicates that the ship
has been sunk.

2.2.2 Fuel - The amount of oil in a ship's oil tanks, it
is expended during the movement of a ship.

2.2.3 Shadow - The act of following an enemy ship.

2.2.4 Visibility level - A measure of the severity of the
weather. The map is given one visibility level each turn.
The levels are 1 = calm seas, 2 = rough seas, 3 = stormy seas




2.3 Mapboard Codes

Each ship is given a one letter ID which identifies the
location of the ship on the mapboard. British ports are
indicated by a red anchor, while neutral ports are indicated
by a white Anchor.

2.4 Mapboard Coordinates

To read the map coordinates first read the row number and
then the column number. Example Capetown is on row 22 and
column 28, and thus is considered to be at square 2228.

3.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY

Each scenario is played by repeating a series of game-turns.
Each game-turn consists of seven major parts listed below.
The parts are listed in their order of occurance during a
game-turn.

3.1 Shadow Phase

During this phase the computer will alert you if you have
spotted the Graf Spee, and if so allow you to attempt to
shadow. If a shadow is attempted the German player will
be asked to move the Graf Spee.

3.2 Order Entry Phase

3.2.1 British Orders Phase

The British player secretly enters his orders to his ships.

3.2.2 German Orders Phase

The German player(or the computer) secretly enters his orders
to his ships.

3.3 Computer Activity Phase

3.3.1 Ship movement Phase

The computer obeys the Player's orders and moves all units
to their new positions, while updating the fuel status of
each ship.

3.3.2 Search Phase

The computer checks for the spotting of enemy ships and
alerts the players of any sightings.

3.4 Combat Phase

If ships have been spotted, combat may occur in the
following order:

1. Attacks by Graf Spee on unescorted aircraft carriers.
2. Aircraft attacks from the Ark Royal and/or Hermes.
3. Surface Combat.

The players conduct combat while the computer resolves
the attacks, records damage, calculates withdrawals.

3.5 Merchant Ship Spotting Phase

The computer determines whether any enemy merchant ships
have been spotted and sunk and whether the merchant ship
was able to send a radio message of its location before
it was sunk.

3.6 Victory Determination Phase

If both the Altmark and the Graf Spee have been sunk, or it
is the December 25 PM turn, the game will end and the final
victory point totals for each side will be displayed. The
British player will now have an opportunity to display the
paths taken by the German ships during the game.

3.7 Save The Game Option

At this time the players may save a game in progress for
resumption at a later date. Note: After a game has been
saved, the player's may continue to play.

4.0 GENERAL COMMANDS

4.1 After the player has entered his password. The locations
of his ships are displayed on the computer screen. The computer
will ask the player to enter a general command.

4.2 O = Order Ships. Allows the player to give orders to his
ships as described in section 5.0

4.3 P = Patrol(British Player Only) Places all British ships
into patrol mode.

4.4 L#### = List Ships(British Player Only) Lists the ships in
square ####.

4.5 S = Order a Single ship. Allows a player to give orders
to any one of his ships.

4.6 C = Check ship status. This command allows the player to
look at the status of any of his combat ships.

4.7 F = Finished. This command ends the player's order
entry phase.

4.8 E = End game. This command will end the game. The Game
will go directly to the victory determination phase.

5.0 SHIP COMMANDS AND CAPABILITIES

5.1 During each order entry phase the player may order any,
all or none of his ships to move. The "O" command is used
to get to the "Order Ships" section of the program. When
this is done the computer displays one ship at a time and
asks for a movement command. The "O" command can be given
as many times as the player wishes to until the player is
satisfied with the orders given. The "S" command may also
be given as many times as desired.

5.2 Movement Commands

5.2.1 N  = Move one square north.
5.2.2 NE = Move one square northeast.
5.2.3 E  = Move one square east.
5.2.4 SE = Move one square southeast.
5.2.5 S  = Move one square south.
5.2.6 SW = Move one square southwest.
5.2.7 W  = Move one square west.
5.2.8 NW = Move one square northwest.

5.2.9 P = Patrol mode. Do not move the ship this turn. If
this ship is in port then it automatically refuels and
attempts to repair any damage (the Graf Spee will attempt
to refuel if in the same hex as Altmark).

5.2.10 A ship that is not ordered will continue to execute
the last order it was given.

5.3 Legal Squares For Ships

5.3.1 British ships may move into and out of any All-Sea
square on the map and into and out of any port.

5.3.2 German ships may move into and out of any All-Sea
square and into and out of any port, however, if a German
ship enters a British port than it is automatically sunk.

5.3.3 A ship will automatically be given a P order if it
is ordered to enter any hex which it is not allowed to enter.

5.3.4 The Altmark may exit off the north edge of the board
if it moves north while on row 11. If the Altmark exits it may
not return to the game.

5.4 The Ship Detail Line is the line of text displayed by the
computer when the player is ordering his ships. Below is the
Ship Detail Line for the British Battlecruiser Renown used
as an example.

(1)    (2)    (3)    (4)    (5)    (6)    (7)    (8)
 R   RENOWN  1420     29    000%   100     20     SW

(1) Ship Code
(2) Name
(3) Square the ship is in at the beginning of the turn.
(4) Maximum Speed in knots.
(5) Damage Level
(6) Victory Points
(7) Fuel Remaining
(8) Current Orders

5.5 Ship Movement And Fuel

All ships with a maximum speed of at least 1 knot may move
one square on AM turns. All ships with a maximum speed of
20 knots may move one square on PM game turns.

5.5.1 All ships lose one fuel factor on Am turns (irregardless
of movement).

5.5.2 Ships which move on PM turns lose three fuel factors.
Ships in patrol mode do not expend fuel during PM numbered turns.

5.6 When a ship's remaining fuel reaches 0 the ship may only
move on AM turns and may not shadow. For each turn a ship
spends at sea without fuel, the opponent player receives one
victory point. A ship which has 1 or 2 fuel factors remaining
may move on a PM turn, but would end the turn with 0
fuel remaining.

6.0 SEARCH: HOW TO FIND THE ENEMY

6.1 During the computer search phase the computer judges
whether opposing ships have spotted each other. The computer
uses the number of British ships in a square and the weather
conditions to determine if German ships have been sighted.

6.2 The computer uses the following formula to determine
whether German ships are spotted by British ships in the
same square: % chance of spotting = 1-{.1X [(3 X visibility level)
-(.4 X number of British ships in square)]}

6.3 Each turn a new visibility level (VL) is selected and
displayed on the upper right hand corner of the map. There is
a 30% chance of calm seas(VL=1), a 30% chance of rough seas
(VL=2), and a 40% chance of stormy seas (VL=3).

6.4 Spotting is considered to be mutual. All ships in a
square are spotted by both players as soon as the British
have successfully spotted a German ship.

6.5 Players will only be given information about enemy ships
that are spotted. Thus the British player will not see the
german ships displayed on his mapboard until he actually
spots a ship. Once the Graf Spee is spotted it will appear
on the British player's mapboard. British ships will never
be displayed on the German player's mapboard.

6.6 For search purposes (only) the Ark royal is considered
to be three ships, and the Hermes is considered to be two
ships (this is dure to their aircraft).

6.7 Ships in patrol mode are considered to be three ships
for search purposes (Ark Royal) in patrol equals nine, Hermes
in patrol equals six).

6.8 The probability of spotting the Altmark is 30% less than
the probability derived from the formula in 6.2 above. The
Altmark could easily be mistaken for a British merchant ship.

7.0 SHADOW

7.1 If the Graf Spee has been spotted and the British player
wishes to maintain contact with it (shadow) the computer
will allow him to do so during the shadow phase of each turn.
The ships involved will be displayed on the screen and the
computer will ask the German player to secretly give orders
to the Graf Spee. The computer will then calculate the results
and report "SHADOW SUCCEEDED" or "SHADOW FAILED", and if
succeeded will givw the direction of the Graf Spee's movement.
If shadowed, the Graf Spee may not be given orders during the
next German order entry phase, but in place of this it will
execute the orders just entered.

7.2 Shadow Resolution. The computer uses the following formula
to determine the results of a potential shadow:

probability of successful shadow = (3 + # of ships attempting
to shadow - VL)/6

7.3 The Ark Royal and the Hermes may not be used to shadow
the Graf Spee and are not counted when using the formula
given above.

7.4 A successful shadow does not guarantee that the Graf Spee
will be spotted during the next search phase.

7.5 Only ships with a current maximum speed equal to or greater
than the current speed of the Graf Spee may attempt to shadow.

8.0 SOLITAIRE

When playing solitaire the computer will make all of the
decisions for the German navy. All normal rules apply
during solitaire.

9.0 LOCATING MERCHANT SHIPS

9.1 Each turn the british player has a chance of spotting
a German merchant ship. The probability is based on the
number of British ships in patrol mode:1/2% chance for each
ship in patrol mode. There is a 50% chance that the German
ship is able to radio its last position and the name of one
of its attackers.

9.2 british shipping lanes are indicated on the mapboard
with white dots. nine dots in a square represents areas with
the largest amount of ship traffic, three dots in a square
represents medium traffic areas, and one dot represents light
traffic areas. The Graf Spee has a 455 chance of sighting and
sinking a British merchant ship in the highest density areas,
a 25% chance in the medium traffic areas, and a 5% chance in
the light density areas. The Graf Spee also has a 1% chance
of sinking a ship in a non-shipping lane square. The chance
of sinking a merchant ship is divided by 5 if the Graf Spee
moves during the turn, divided by 1.5 if the visibility is
three, and multiplied by 2 if the visibility is one.

9.3 When a british mechant ship is sunk there is a 50% chance
that the ship is able to radio a message giving the location
of the Graf Spee.

9.4 The German supply ship altmark is a non-combat ship
which is automatically sunk if sighted by a British ship,
unless the Graf Spee is in the same square.

10.0 REFUELING

10.1 The Graf Spee may refuel in any South American port
or from the Altmark(if in the same square) by giving a
P order.

10.2 All British ships may refuel in any port by giving a
P order.

10.3 When refueling, a ship's current fuel level is set
equal to its maximum level.

11.0 REPAIRS

11.1 When in port a ship with a P order will repair 0-10%
of its current damage (determined randomly). Exaple: The
Graf Spee repairs while having 40% damage. At the end of
the turn it will have between 30-40% damage.

11.2 Items which may be repaired are:
1) Hull
2) Superstructure
3) A,B,X.Y, turret strength(but not guns), thus a damaged
   turret can be brought up to full strength, but a destroyed
   turret may not be rebuilt.

11.3 Each turn a ship with its maximum speed reduced will
regain between 0 and 10 knots to its maximum speed.

12.0 NEUTRAL PORTS

12.1 Whenever the Graf Spee enters a South American port
(squares 1817, 2016, 2313) the british player is informed
of its location. Also, the first time that the Graf Spee
enters a neutral port there is a 50% chance that it will
scuttle itself. if it does not scuttle itself at that time
it may reenter neutral ports without having to check for
scuttling.

12.2 The Graf Spee and the Altmark may be attacked while
in port and the Graf Spee may be shadowed when it leaves port.

13.0 AIRCRAFT CARRIER COMBAT

13.1 Whenever an unescorted (no friendly non-aircraft carrier
ship in the same square) aircraft carrier is found by the
Graf Spee, there is a chance that the carrier will be sunk.
The following formula is used to determine the probability
of the carrier being sunk:

% chance of being sunk = [(Graf Spee current speed + 15 -
carrie current speed) X .33 X visibility level].

13.2 If an aircraft carrier survives an attack (or is escorted
and thus is not attacked) it will launch an airstrike at the
Graf Spee. Airstrikes will not be launched if the visibility
level is 3. The Ark Royal has a 50% chance of scoring a
torpedo hit with its airstrike, while the Hermes has a 17%
chance of scoring a torpedo hit. If a hit is scored the Graf
Spee will lose up to a maximum of 6 hull points and 15 knots.

14.0 SURFACE COMBAT (Off-line Combat)

Surface combat occurs whenever non-carrier British ships
occupy the same square with the Graf Spee and the Graf Spee
has been spotted. Before combat begins the players will be
offered the opportunity to resolve the combat off-line(using-
any method the players desire) or on-line using the tactical
game provided by the computer,

14.1  If the players decide to resolve combat off-line they
will be asked to input the status of each ship involved in
the combat as of the completion of the battle. The following
values for each ship must be entered:

1) Number of guns remaining in each turret.
2) Strength remaining of each turret.
3) Hull points remaining.
4) Superstructure points remaining.
5) Secondary guns remaining.
6) Current maximum speed

Be careful not to enter something illegal (such as adding-
secondary guns to a British ship)for there is no guarantee
that the program will not crash if this is done. After stats
for a ship have been entered the player will have a chance to
reenter these stats if a mistake has been made. When using
the off-line feature, players should take note of the prevailing
visibility level when setting up the engagement.

15.0 SURFACE COMBAT (On-line Combat)

15.1  If the players decide not to use off-line combat the
computer will set up the tactical combat game. The following
sequence will be used during tactical combat:

15.1.1 German order entry phase

The German player will secretly give orders to the Graf Spee
by answering a series of questions.

15.1.2 British order entry phase

The British player will secretly give orders to one ship at a
time through answering of a series of questions, until all ships
have received orders.

15.1.3 Gunfire and torpedo fire execution phase

All gunfire and torpedoe attascks will be resolved by the
computer simultaneously with the results given on the screen.

15.1.4 Ship movement phase

The computer will move all ships to their new locations based
on the orders given to them and the damage sustained during
the preceeding gunfire and torpedoe fire execution phase.

15.1.5 Disengagement check

The computer will determine if opposing ships are still within
sight of one another and if so will return to step 15.1.1.
If no enemy ships are within sight of each other combat will
end and the computer will return players to the strategic game.

15.2 Tactical combat Setup

Tactical combat is resolved on a x,y coordinate grid system
with each point on the grid representing 100 yards and each
turn representing 3 minutes.

Compass headings are as follows:

000 = toward the top edge of the computer screen (North).
090 = toward the right edge of the computer screen (East)
180 = toward the bottom edge of the computer screen (South).
270 = toward the left edge of the computer screen (West).

At the beginning of combat the Graf Spee is placed at co-
ordinates 5000,5000 with a course of 000 degrees and a speed
equal to its current maximum speed. All British ships are
placed on the board due south of the Graf Spee also with
headings of 000 and speeds set to their current maximums.
The distance between the British ships and the Graf Spee is
determined based on the current visibility level as follows:

Visibility = 1 randomly between 24000-28000 yards(240-280 x,y
points).
Visibility = 2 randomly between 16000-20000 yards (160-200 x,y
points).
Visibility = 3 randomly between 8000-12000 yards(80-120 x,y points)

15.3 The Order Entry Phase

The order entry phase contains of 4 major questions concerning
the ship being ordered:

1) Does the ship wish to change speed?
2) Does the ship wish to change course?
3) Does the ship wish to change targets its guns are firing upon?
4) Does the ship wish to fire its torpedoes?

Some of these questions may be skipped over if inappropriate
to the ship being ordered (i.e. a ship with out torpedoes will
not be asked whether it wishes to fire torpedoes), and some
questions may be automatically answered because of some other
action taken (i.e. a ship that changes its course by greater
than 30 degrees in the same turn must automatically change
its targets so it will not be asked the question).

15.4 Speed

A ship may be given any speed between 0 and its current maximum
speed. A ship damaged during combat such that its current maximum
speed is lower than its current speed will automatically lower
its speed so that it is equal to its current maximum speed.
A ship may speed up or slow down at will within the limits
given above, however most players will discover that they will
in most cases desire to travel at their maximum speed (the
slower you travel the greater the chance of being hit by
enemy fire). For each knot of speed a ship will traverse 1
point on the x,y coordinate grid each turn. Example: A ship
with a speed of 25 knots with a heading of 90 degrees and a
location of 0,0 will end its turn at location 25,0(assuming it
is not slowed due to damage from enemy fire).

15.5 Course

A ship may be given any course between 0 and 359 degrees.
All ships may turn immediately to any course desired. The
turn is executed at the beggining of the ship movement
phase (as if the ship could turn on a dime). The only
penalty associated with drastic course changes is that
new targets must be selected whenever a ship orders a new
course which is a change greater than 30 degrees from its
previous course. Although the new targets fired at may remain
the same, the process of choosing new targets causes a new set
of ranging shots on the target, thus decreasing the chances
of hitting the target during the turn (see selecting targets).
Thus players are advised to limit their course changes to 30
degrees or less if possible. A ship sustaining temporary
rudder damage may not change course for the duration of the
tactical combat.

15.6 Selecting Targets

In order to fire its guns, a ship must choose a target for its
guns. Each British ship has two sets of guns(bow guns A+B turrets,
and stern guns, X+Y turrets), while the Graf Spee has four sets
of guns (bow,stern,starboard secondaries, port secondaries).
Each set has a different firing Arc as listed below:

Bow guns have a 240 degree arc of fire all but the back
120 degrees.

Stern guns also have a 240 degree arc of fire all but the
front 120 degrees.(for British ships and the Graf Spee)

For the Graf Spee only. Starboard secondaries have a middle
arc of 120 degrees off the right side of the ship. Port
secondaries also have a middle arc of 120 degrees off the
left side of the ship.

When entering the target desired, the computer will list the
code of the current target for the guns being considered, with
a 0 if no target currently exists. To enter a target enter the
letter ID code of the ship you wish to fire at. If this is an
illegal target (guns cannot bear on target or target is out of
range, see data card) the computer will ask for another target.
If you wish to keep the same target press return. If you desire
not to fire press 0. The first turn a ship fires on a target,
the fire will be at one third effectiveness, for the ship is
considered to be ranging in its guns on the target. On the
second and future consecutive turns of firing on the same target
the guns will fire at full effectiveness. Whenever a ship changes
course by greater than 30 degrees the computer will eliminate
previous targets, requiring the ship to once again range in on
enemy ships. If a player states that he does not wish to
change targets the computer will check to see whether all
current targets are legal targets, and if they are not, the
player will be forced to enter new targets. Remember that each
set of guns fires independently (one set may be ranging in on
a new target while another may be already ranged in on a
different target).

15.7 Torpedo fire

Ships with torpedoes will be given the opportunity to fire
torpedoes at enemy ships. Torpedoes may be fired once during
each tactical combat (i.e. they may not be reloaded during
combat). Torpedoes have a range of 8000 yards with the chance
hitting the enemy reduced at longer ranges and when trying
to hit a fast moving ship. If the Graf Spee is firing its
torpedoes it will be asked to enter the code of the desired
target. A torpedo hit will cause the loss of up to 12 hull
points and 30 knots. torpedo damage to the Graf Spee and
Renown is halved.

15.8 Combat Ship Detail Line

When giving orders, a ships characteristics will be displayed
on the screen in the following manner:

Name Hull Aguns Bguns Portsec Starbsec Xguns Yguns Maxspd Curspd Curcou
  G   20    0     3      4       4       3     0     26     26     000

Name = ship ID code
Hull = hull points remaining
Aguns = number of guns remaining in A turret
Bguns = number of guns in B turret
Portsec = number of port secondaries
Starbsec = number of starboard secondaries
Xguns = number of guns in X turret
Yguns = number of guns in Y turret
Maxspd = maximum speed possible
Curspd = current speed
curcouse = current course

15.9 Possible Responses to Questions

When a major question is aked the computer will allow the
following answers:

Y = yes
N = no
C = check staus of a friendly ship
X = display x, y coordinates of each ship
P = display current speed, course, and range to the Graf Spee
    of each ship

15.10 Visibility and Disengagement

A ship may not fire at a ship it cannot see. Visibility limits
are as follows:

Visibility     Range

    1          28000 yards (280 points)
    2          20000 yards (200 points
    3          12000 yards (120 points)

Combat will end when no British ship is within sighting
range of the Graf Spee.

15.11 Gunfire Combat Resolution (hits scored)

Combat is resolved by first determining the number of hits
scored on an enemy ship. The number of hits is determined
by the type of guns (guns with less strength fire more often
and thus have a greater chance of hitting), the speed of the
target (slower the target is moving the greater the number
of hits), the range to the target(the closer the target the
greater the number of hits), and the number of guns firing at
the target(the greater the number of guns firing the greater
the number of hits). The number of hits scored is also affected
by the following:

Ranging in on target ship                     33%
Visibility = 2                                90%
Visibility = 3                                80%
Firing ships fire control center destroyed    67%
Firing ship has temporary rudder damage       67%

These affects are cumulative, thus a ship in visibility 3
with its fire control center destroyed would score only
(.8 X .67 = .536) 53.6% of the hits it would have otherwise
scored.

15.12 Gunfire Combat Resolution (location of hits scored)

When a hit is scored the location of the hit on the target
ship is determined. The following is a breakdown of possible
locations of hits based on the range to the target ship:

Location of Hit        Range > 16000yards  Range<16000yards

Superstructure(no armor)       15%               15%
Secondary gun(no armor)        15%               15%
Hull (no armor)                 5%                5%
Main turret (no armor)          1%                1%
Hull (belt armor)              14%               30%
Fire control center (belt)      3%                3%
Rudder (belt armor)             1%                1%
Hull (deck armor)              21%                5%
Main turret (turret armor)     25%               25%

The Graf Spee has a 6% greater chance of being hit on the
hull deck armor and a 6% lower chance of being hit on the
turret armor. Some hits on armor protected hull will also
cause the destruction of a turret, while hits on the hull
deck armor at greater than 16000 yards and the hull belt
armor at less than 16000 yards have a small chance of
hitting a main magazine and sinking the ship.

15.13 Gunfire Combat Resolution (armor penetration)

When the location of a hit is discovered the computer will
check to see if  the shell penetrated any protective armor
encountered. Refer to the data card to see what guns
penetrate what armor at what range. If the hit is on the
Belt or Deck armor and shell does not penetrate the  armor,
the hit does no damage to the target ship. If the hit is on
the Turret armor and the shell does not penetrate the armor
then the strength of a main turret(determined at random) on
the target ship is reduced by the value of the gun firing.
If the strength of a turret is reduced to 0 the turret is
destroyed and the number of guns in the turret becomes 0.
Example: the Exeter scores one hit on the Graf Spee's X-
turret, but does not penetrate the armor(range greater than
12000 yards), thus reducing the strength of the X turret by
2 points(value of Exeter's guns). If the Graf Spee's X turret
strength has been reduce to 1 or 2 then this hit would
destroy the turret.

15.14 Gunfire combat resolution(damage caused by penetrating hits)

Hits on the superstructure will reduce the strength of the
superstructure by the value of the gun firing. If the Super-
structure is reduced to 0 then all future superstructure hits
reduce the hull. hits on the secondary guns will cause the
loss of one secondary gun. If secondary guns are reduced to
0 then all future secondary hits will cause damage to the
superstrucure. Hits on the hull will reduce the strength of
the hull by the value of the gun firing while also causing
a reduction in maximum speed of up to 30 knots. It is possible
for the hull to be reduced by more than the value of the gun
firing, although the chance of this is never greater than 30%.
Hits on a main turret will cause the destruction of the turret.
repeated hits on an already destroyed turret will cause no
further damage.

16.0 SCENARIOS

16.1 The December 1 scenario begins with the December 1 AM
turn and ends after the December 25 PM turn.

16.2 The December 13 scenario begins with the computer
execution phase of  the December 13 AM turn and ends after
the December 25 PM turn. All ships are considered to be in
patrol mode during the first turn of the game. The german
player begins with 40 victory points. The Graf Spee is auto-
matically sighted on the first turn of the game.

17.0 VICTORY CONDITIONS

17.1 Victory is determined by comparing victory point
totals of both sides at the end of the game and referring
to the chart provided below. There are three possible ways
in which the game may end.
1) The game ends if the graf Spee and the altmark are both
sunk or exited from the board.
2) The game ends after the december 25 PM turn.
3) The game ends when a player decides to end the game by
giving an E command(this is not an official way of ending
the game, and should only be done if both players agree to it.

17.2 The computer records all victory points scored and
reveals the totals at the end of the game. Each player receives
victory points for sinking enemy ships. Players also receive
victory points for damaging enemy ships which are not yet sunk.
The following formula is used to allocate victory points for
damaged ships: vp = .005 X %damaged X vp's for sinking.

17.3 The German player begins the december 13 scenario with
40 victory points.

17.4 Viictory is decided by subtracting the British victory
points from the German victory points and comparing the
arrived at total with the following chart:

 VP TOTAL                  LEVEL OF VICTORY

 115 or more               German decisive
 85 to 114                 German substantive
 55 to 84                  German Marginal
 45 to 55                  Draw
 15 to 44                  British Marginal
-15 to 44                  British substantive
-16 or less                British Decisive

18.0 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This game is dedicated to the R+D staff of SSI. To John Lyon for
his computer Bismarck code which formed the foundation of the
strategic game, and to Paul Murray for his triginometry formulas
which allowed me to conquer the tactical game system.

19.0 CREDITS
Game Design and Programming: Joel Billings
Historical Notes: Robert billings
Customized Disk Operating System: Richard Gustafsson
Art and Graphic Design: Loius Hsu Saekow and Kevin Heney
Typesetting: Abracadabra Type
Printing: A&a Printers
