DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR
Strategic Studies Group (SSG)
SCENARIOS (VOL I)

There are 6 scenarios included with the Decisive Battles  of
the  American  Civil  War Vol I game.  The  First  Bull  Run
scenario (#1) is the tutorial and is highly recommended  for
beginners.  In  order  of increasing complexity,  the  other
scenarios are Shiloh (#2), Fredericksburg (#5), Second  Bull
Run (#3), Antietam (#4) and Chancellorsville (#6).
Each scenario is accompanied by a short historical briefing,
a  situation  map  an  order of battle, player's  notes  and
scenario variants.
Before  playing a scenario, we recommend you  read  all  the
notes and examine the situation map.

1. THE BATTLE OF FIRST BULL RUN
July 21st, 1861
The  first major battle of the Civil War was fought at  Bull
Run,  near Manassas railway junction (after which the battle
is  sometimes named). The armies involved were not large  by
Civil  War  standards. On the Union side, led by  Brigadier-
General  Irvin  McDowell,  were  approximately  30,000   men
divided into four divisions under Tyler, Hunter, Heintzelman
and Miles. On the Confederate side, led by Brigadier-General
Pierre  Gustav Toutant Beauregard, was a similar  number  of
troops divided into thirteen infantry brigades under Bonham,
Ewell,  Jones,  Longstreet, Cocke, Early,  Holmes,  Kershaw,
Evans,  Jackson,  Bartow,  Bee and  Smith  and  one  cavalry
brigade  under Stuart. Few of the troops on either side  had
been in battle before.
Each  general  had planned a turning movement on  the  right
flank but confusion in the orders meant that the Confederate
attack  did  not develop properly and it was on Beauregard's
left  flank  that  the battle was mostly fought.  McDowell's
plan  involved  a  feint by Tyler's division  at  the  stone
bridge  and  a further feint by a brigade of Miles'  reserve
division  at Blackburn's ford. Simultaneously, Hunter's  and
Heintzelman's divisions would attack from the north,  having
crossed Bull Run at Sudley Springs.
McDowell  had  allowed for the difficulties  of  moving  his
inexperienced troops into position by starting the  flanking
movement  at  2.00 am but even so they did not reach  Sudley
Springs until 9.30, some two and a half hours late. By  this
time  the  false attacks at the stone bridge and Blackburn's
ford  had  been  underway for some hours and Beauregard  was
becoming  highly suspicious at their lack of progress.  When
he received a message that troops were crossing the Bull Run
at Sudley Springs he knew at once that this must be the main
attack and moved accordingly.
McDowell  had  about 18,000 men in his attacking  force  and
Beauregard  was  obliged to feed in  troops  piece-meal  and
several times the defence nearly broke. He was aided by  men
like Evans and Bee who moved in their brigades on their  own
initiative  and by the staunchness of Jackson's  Virginians.
Bee's  rallying cry "There is Jackson standing like a  stone
wall", was the origin of Jackson's famous nickname.
By  about 3.30 pm his line was not only solid, it overlapped
the  Union lines on their right flank and he gave the orders
for an attack. The green Union troops gave back, at first in
a  fairly  ordered  retreat, but as the  pressure  continued
cries  of  "Betrayal!" broke out and they panicked and  ran.
The  equally  green  Confederate troops, however,  were  too
disorganised  to  follow  up and the  Union  army  retreated
safely   to   Washington.  Casualties   were   about   2,000
Confederate to 3,000 Union.

PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION.  The  only thing wrong with the Union  plan  in  this
scenario  is  that  your men are not experienced  enough  to
implement it! Command delays will prevent you from  reaching
New  Market  in time to set up a solid line of defence.  You
can  expect  next  to  no  control over  the  brigades  near
Centreville.  Do  not  be  tempted  to  commit  your  troops
piecemeal.  It  is  better to forgo a little  ground  if  it
allows you to make a co-ordinated attack.
Your  chance of victory improves markedly if you  play  with
the radio flag on.

CONFEDERATE.  Your  troops are not  much  better  that  your
opponent's; it's just that you have less distance  to  cover
to  reach  the likely battlefield. With no corps or division
subordination, you must keep your Army HQ within 4 hexes  of
the  main  battle area and take your chances that  you  will
keep  enough control over your other brigades to  hold  onto
the major Bull Run crossing points.
Form  a  steady line just south of New Market  and  let  the
Federals  move against you. If nothing untoward occurs,  you
should  have enough men to beat them back. If you play  with
the  radio  flag  on,  you can experiment  with  a  push  to
Centreville from the south.

SCENARIO VARIANT
(a).  The  Federals were completely surprised  to  find  the
brigades   of  Jackson,  Bartow,  Bee  and  Smith   on   the
battlefield; they had freshly railed in from the Shenandoah.
In  fact, troops were still debarking after midday! You  can
remove  these  brigades completely from  the  data  base  or
better still give each an arrival turn of 1, 2, 3 or  4  and
set  a likelihood value for each of 4 or 5. As you will see,
the  Civil War very nearly got off to a completely different
start.

2. THE BATTLE OF SHILOH
April 6th-7th, 1862
The  battle  fought between Shiloh Church and the  Pittsburg
Landing  on the Tennessee River was initiated by Confederate
Generals Johnston and Beauregard in an attempt to catch  the
Union Armies divided. Ulysses S. Grant, Halleck's second  in
command, was camped on the Tennessee with 40,000 men in  six
divisions. He was awaiting the arrival of Buell's Corps with
a  further 20,000 men. The Confederate forces also  numbered
40,000  and  were  divided  into four  corps  together  with
Forest's  cavalry brigade. As Grant's flanks were  protected
there was no alternative but a frontal attack. Johnston  and
Beauregard  relied on surprise to tip the balance  in  their
favour.
Setting  out from Corinth on 3rd April, Johnston planned  to
attack  on 4th but the inexperience of his marchers and  the
difficult wooded terrain meant that his troops were  not  in
position  until  the  evening of the  5th.  By  this  stage,
Beauregard  wanted  to call the whole thing  off,  convinced
that  surprise  had been lost. He was wrong, but  he  should
have  been right. The men blundered along with all sorts  of
noise  and inefficiency. Grant, however, was convinced  that
his   enemy   would  not  leave  Corinth  and  ignored   all
indications to the contrary.
When  the  attack came on the morning of the 6th, therefore,
Grant's  army was still cooking its breakfast. Prentiss  and
Sherman  were  nearest  to  the point  of  attack  and  both
abandoned their coffee rapidly. Nevertheless they managed to
form  a  rough line and McClernand came up to fill  the  gap
between  them. Although many of the troops were green,  most
of  them  held  to their guns, giving way only  under  heavy
pressure. Prentiss was making a stand in the natural shallow
trench  of  a  sunken  road, soon to  become  known  as  the
"Hornets'  Nest".  As the day wore on he held  his  position
against   twelve  assaults  and  two  hours  of  point-blank
cannonade  from 62 guns. Finally, outflanked and  surrounded
he  surrendered  at  5.30  pm, his entire  division  killed,
wounded or captured.
His  stand  had given Grant what he needed, which was  time.
Lew  Wallace's division was camped some five miles away  and
Nelson's division of Buell's Corps was somewhere across  the
river  and he sent out urgent messages hurrying them on.  In
the  event  neither arrived in time to fight  that  day  but
Grant managed to hold a line about one and a half miles back
from  his  starting position. The Confederate attack  became
disjointed  as  units  became mixed  in  the  rough,  wooded
terrain. Matters were not helped much by the death of Albert
Sidney  Johnston  who bled to death from a  severed  femoral
artery.
Beauregard had received a false report that Buell was moving
towards  Decatur so he made no effort to withdraw overnight.
Although  he did not realise it, his position was  hopeless.
Grant had more than 20,000 fresh troops and outnumbered  his
opponent significantly. The Union attack initially took  the
Confederate  troops  by surprise and they  gave  ground  but
Beauregard was able to make an orderly withdrawal .
Casualties on both sides were high: 13,047 Union and  10,694
Confederate,  almost  one quarter of  the  troops  involved,
figures  which  shocked both sides.  There  were  cries  for
Grant's  dismissal  but the pragmatic  Lincoln  refused.  "I
can't spare this man" he said "He fights." Each side claimed
some  sort  of  victory  but  the  strategic  advantage  was
definitely  with  the Union for the South  was  never  again
strong enough to re-take Western Tennessee.

PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION.  Your Army HQ does not arrive until turn 3  which  is
probably  for the best since your sleepy, front line  troops
are  getting  pounded  by the Rebs just  as  you  arrive  at
Pittsburg  Landing.  You must try to stem  the  rout.  Cloud
field  is  a  good place to set up a solid line of  defence.
Wheel  your  artillery batteries into  position  here.  Your
objective on the first day is to hang onto the vital landing
so that Buell's men can reinforce you on the second day.
The  Rebs  will  run out of puff if they don't  capture  the
Landing  and  you can expect to take back most of  the  lost
ground by game's end.

CONFEDERATE.  Johnston and Beauregard have deployed  for  an
all-or-nothing assault against an unprepared enemy. Hit  the
forward  Federal brigades as hard as you can while they  are
still encamped. You can expect to destroy 3 to 6 units  this
way.  Keep on the move with the aim of preventing Grant from
establishing a solid line. If the Federals firm up too  soon
(and  too far away from the Landing), you will find it heavy
going to reach the Tennessee. By late afternoon, reinforcing
Federals  will have evened up the forces and  your  own  men
will  be  exhausted.  Don't throw tired  men  against  fresh
troops!
If  you're close to the Landing on the morning of the second
day,  you  can try one more assault. Otherwise, dig  in  and
delay the Federal counter-attack as long as possible.

SCENARIO VARIANT
(a).  General  Earl  van Dorn and his  Army  of  the  Trans-
Mississippi was supposed to meet up with Johnston's Army  of
the  Mississippi  at Corinth by the end of March,  1862.  As
events  turned  out,  van  Dorn  was  "foiled"  in  northern
Arkansas   near  Pea  Ridge  so  that  he  never  made   the
rendezvous.  Let's assume he arrived on the  battlefield  on
the  evening of the 6th and his troops were ready for action
on  the morning of the 7th. To add Van Dorn's troops to  the
data  base will require the addition of 1 corps HQ  (#5),  2
divisions  (#5-6) and 6 brigades (#19-24). The division  and
brigade  data can be found in the accompanying  tables.  The
corps HQ data is as follows (Van Dorn) (3) (16) (0) (14) (0)
(4) (13) (9) (0) (3) (2) (2) (7).
IBM  users will find the variant units already installed  in
the  Shiloh data base. Their arrival times have been set  to
95  to  deactivate  them. To bring them  to  life,  set  the
arrival  time of Van Dorn's Corps to 14, Little,  Slack  and
Green's brigades to 14, Hebert and McIntosh's brigades to 15
and Pike's brigade to 16.
To add a little suspense to Van Dorn's participation, assign
a  likelihood  value of 4 or 5 to all the brigades  and  the
corps HQ.

THE BATTLE OF SECOND BULL RUN
August 29th-30th, 1862
The  second battle at Bull Run Creek occurred after  several
days  of  manoeuvre on the part of both armies.  Lee  turned
Pope out of a strong defensive position near Sulphur Springs
on  the  Rappahannock by sending Jackson around  behind  his
lines  to  destroy  his supply base at  Manassas,  which  he
burned  on 27th. Pope set out in pursuit but could not  find
Jackson  until a sharp engagement at Groveton on the evening
of  28th  revealed  his position. Pope's army  consisted  of
60,000  men  divided into five corps under Sigel,  McDowell,
Heintzelman,  Porter  and  Reno. Lee's  consisted  of  about
52,000  in  two corps under Jackson (25,000)  and,  when  he
arrived, Longstreet (27,000).
Jackson  was  deployed  in a NE-SW  line  in  an  unfinished
railway cutting in the woods to the north of Groveton.  Pope
planned co-ordinated attacks on both flanks but this  proved
impossible  as McDowell and Porter had been delayed  in  the
darkness.  However, he sent in Sigel, Reno and  Heintzelman.
An  attack on Jackson's left flank nearly broke through  but
was  held  in  some savage hand-to-hand fighting.  All  day,
Jackson's line wavered as it was struck by repeated  attacks
but  it never quite broke. Pope was annoyed with Porter  for
not  attacking  Jackson's right but Porter  refused,  saying
that he was facing Longstreet and half the Confederate army.
Pope  did  not believe him but it was true - Longstreet  had
arrived  mid-morning, but took no part in  the  battle  that
day, being worried about reports of troops at Manassas (this
turned out to have been Porter).
On the 30th, Pope, observing only a few of Jackson's troops,
assumed that he was retreating and prepared to follow up. In
point  of  fact,  his  own position was  precarious  in  the
extreme  for Jackson had simply pulled back into  the  woods
for a rest. With Longstreet deploying to the south, Pope was
in  the jaws of a "V", the apex of which was bristling  with
artillery. Pope took time to prepare his "pursuit"  properly
and  it  was  not  until mid-afternoon that the  attack  was
launched. The canny Longstreet waited until all the reserves
were committed before unleashing his artillerymen. They sent
heavy,  rapid  fire  into the flank of the  advancing  Union
troops who fell back shattered.
At  last,  Longstreet sent his soldiers  forward.  Jackson's
men, realising this, also swept forward and the jaws of  the
nut-cracker closed. The Union retreat, although precipitate,
was  a  marked  contrast to the retreat from 1st  Bull  Run,
almost  a year before. It lacked the overall sense of panic,
and  a number of fighting stands meant that the retreat  was
successfully carried out. Nevertheless, the casualty figures
-  Pope's  total  of killed, wounded and  captured  came  to
18,000 compared to Lee's 9,000 - told the story.

PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION. Delays on the evening of the 28th have meant that not
all of your troops are in position to assault Jackson's men,
now  deployed  along an unfinished rail-road  cut  north  of
Groveton. It will take quite some time to get all  your  men
into position. Indeed, you will need three or four turns  to
get up to the front yourself. You may not be able to prevent
your  lead units from engaging the Rebs until you get  there
in  person  and deploy them out of harm's way.  Only  a  co-
ordinated attack has any hope of driving Jackson off  Sudley
Mountain.
Beware  of Longstreet's arrival. His men begin appearing  on
the  afternoon of the 29th. Defence in depth  is  the  right
plan for the second day.

CONFEDERATE.  Tactically, the situation  is  pretty  simple.
Jackson's  men are too outnumbered to consider  moving  away
from  their  good position. What they must do  is  hold  out
against  all  attacks until Longstreet  is  in  position  to
launch  a  counter-attack. If the  Union  general  has  been
sensible and not wasted his men piecemeal, it will be a hard
fight to reach the major objectives. Against a spent Federal
force,  however, you have a real chance of driving  the  foe
across Bull Run for a second time.

SCENARIO VARIANT
(a).  Had Pope been able to assemble his troops as intended,
the  going would have been much tougher for Jackson.  Assume
Porter   and  Heintzelman  had  moved  with  greater  speed.
Relocate  all units from Porters Corps to any hex  within  2
hexes  of  the  Bethlehem Church. Relocate  all  units  from
Heintzelman's Corps to any hex within 3 hexes of New Market.
Relocate  pope's  Army HQ to hex 14,9 (New Market).  Do  not
change the arrival times.

THE BATTLE OF ANTIETAM
17th September, 1862
McClellan's 80,000-strong army arrived at Antietam Creek  on
the afternoon of 15th November to find Lee with 18,000 in  a
strong  position in front of Sharpsburg. There was no attack
on  the 16th as McClellan wanted a clear look at the terrain
and  at Lee's dispositions before attacking, which increased
Lee's  numbers to 26,000 when Jackson arrived at noon.  When
the  attack started on 17th, Lee's army was still scattered,
but  by the end of the day, the missing divisions of McLaws,
Anderson  and  A.  P.  Hill would arrive.  McClellan's  plan
consisted  of  an  upstream  crossing  by  Hooker,   Sumner,
Mansfield and Franklin, followed by an attack on Lee's left,
where  Jackson was placed and a simultaneous attack on Lee's
right  by  Burnside against Longstreet. In  the  event,  the
attacks were not well co-ordinated.
Hooker  was  the  first to attack and  in  spite  of  fierce
resistance  he  pushed  back the Confederate  line.  He  was
viciously  counter-attacked and driven back by  the  men  of
Hood's  division  who,  in the Dunker churchyard,  had  been
having  their  first hot meal for days and were consequently
furious at being interrupted. Mansfield then attacked  along
the  same route. Mansfield himself was killed but his  corps
took  and held a forward position just short of the  church.
Williams,  now  in  command,  sent  for  re-inforcements  to
exploit  the  position. Sumner's corps came  up,  but  by  a
different route, and the lead division was caught in  column
on  the  flank by McLaws division (which had arrived earlier
in the morning) and massacred.
This was basically the end of the attack on that flank,  but
Sumner's remaining two divisions pressed forward against  D.
H.  Hill  who was holding the centre with the newly  arrived
Anderson.  Hill had a strong position in a sunken road  but,
due to a misunderstanding, the brigade on the left fell back
and  the others became open to enfilading fire and were also
forced to retire. They were too weak to withstand an assault
and  Franklin, arriving with another five brigades, saw this
and requested permission from Sumner to advance. But Sumner,
still  shaken by the mauling of his first division,  refused
and  so, despite Franklin's pleas, did McClellan. This ended
the attack in the centre.
On  the south flank, Burnside had been trying all morning to
get  across the river by the bridge which was thereafter  to
bear his name. His four divisions were being held at bay  by
a  single brigade under the command of Robert Toombs. It  is
perhaps  typical of the unfortunate Burnside that he  forgot
to  check  the depth of the water by the bridge,  which  was
easily  wadeable. About one o'clock he finally  stormed  the
bridge  and in the face of this, and another division  which
had  found  a ford downstream, Toombs fell back. After  more
delays Burnside finally got the main attack underway at 3.00
pm  and drove towards Sharpsburg. All was going well when A.
P.  Hill  arrived after a forced march from Harper's  Ferry.
Hill's  men  had replaced their tattered uniforms  with  the
neat,  new blue ones they found at Harper's Ferry  and  this
caused  much  confusion as they drove into  Burnside's  left
flank.  The attack, which had been just about to swamp  Lee,
was broken in the nick of time and driven back.
Casualties were heavy on this, the bloodiest day of the  war
being  11,000  Confederate and 12,000 Union.  Strategically,
the   victory   was  McClellan's  for  Lee's  position   was
impossible  and  he was obliged to retreat. Considering  the
possibilities  missed  for a crushing victory,  however,  it
cannot be considered anything but a tactical failure.

PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION.  You  are  in for a day of intense  frustration.  You
outnumber  the  Rebs nearly 3 to 1 yet are hamstrung  by  an
unco-operative  staff  structure and  some  pretty  dreadful
corps  commanders. There's no doubt you will do much  better
with the radio flag on! You can count on Fighting Joe Hooker
to  get  the ball rolling in the north. In the centre  there
will be more reluctance. To keep Burnside moving forward you
must  virtually accompanying him into the battle.  You  must
somehow  apply pressure all along the Confederate  front  to
prevent  them  from establishing a fresh reserve.  Most  Reb
units are very small (and therefore brittle as you will  see
from  the explanation of the combat mechanics given  in  the
game  manual) and cannot survive more than 2 or 3  hours  in
battle.

CONFEDERATE. Your army is in a desperate position and by all
rights  should  have  no  chance  of  avoiding  destruction.
However,  you  have been reprieved. Your one chance  is  the
Union  commander... McClellan. The early  danger  will  come
from  the north as Hooker gets underway at first light. With
normal  luck  you  will be able to beat  off  his  challenge
before  other  formations get into the fight. Reinforcements
begin  arriving around midday and these should  provide  the
strength  to  hold the centre. You must hope  that  Burnside
cannot  cross  the creek until late afternoon at  best  when
Ambrose Hill's men appear to protect the escape route across
Harper's Ferry.

SCENARIO VARIANT
(a). What if McClellan had suffered a bad bout of flu on the
16th  and  had therefore been unable to take command  during
the  battle?  And why not make Sumner and Burnside  likewise
affected?
Some changes have to be made to the command structure. Begin
by placing Hooker in command of the Army of the Potomac. His
army  HQ stats are (Hooker) (-) (Army of) (the Potomac) (15)
(9)  (0)  (7) (1) (0) (0) (9) (4) (5) (5). Promote Meade  to
replace Hooker. Meade's corps stats are (Meade) (6) (2)  (0)
(0) (0) (6) (7) (9) (0) (4) (4) (3) (7). Promote Seymour  to
replace  Meade. Seymour's division stats are  (Seymour)  (4)
(0)  (0)  (6) (7) (4) (4). Add a new brigadier, Roberts,  to
replace  Seymour. Other than the I.D., the brigade  data  is
unaltered.
Sack   Sumner.  Promote  Sedgwick  to  command  the   corps.
Sedgwick's corps stats are (Sedgwick) (17) (9) (0)  (0)  (2)
(0)  (0)  (9) (0) (6) (4) (4) (7). Promote Howard to replace
Sedgwick. Howard's division stats are (Howard) (5)  (0)  (2)
(0)  (0)  (5)  (3).  Add a new brigadier, Owen,  to  replace
Howard. Other than the I.D., the brigade data is unaltered.
Sack Burnside. Promote Rodman to command the corps. Rodman's
corps  stats are (Rodman) (13) (17) (0) (0) (2) (0) (0)  (9)
(0)  (4)  (3) (5) (7). Promote Fairchild to replace  Rodman.
Fairchild's division stats are (Fairchild) (8) (0) (1)  (11)
(0)  (4)  (3).  Add  a  new brigadier, Kimball,  to  replace
Fairchild.  Other  than  the  I.D.,  the  brigade  data   is
unaltered.
Now the Union can have some fun!

THE BATTLE OF FREDERICKSBURG
13th December, 1862
Fredericksburg was Ambrose E. Burnside's only  major  battle
as  commander  as the Army of the Potomac  but  it  forms  a
textbook  example of bad generalship. He had hoped  that  by
crossing  the river at the obvious point he would  take  the
devious  Lee by surprise, which was in itself a great  piece
of  optimism. Nevertheless, when he discovered that Lee  was
ready  and  waiting he did not cancel his  attack  but  went
ahead,  which  represents optimism of a much  more  profound
sort.  His so-called plan of battle was nothing more than  a
direct frontal attack, uphill, against a veteran army  in  a
heavily fortified position and it produced much the disaster
that might be expected.
Lee  allowed the army to cross unopposed on the 12th and  it
spread out on the plain south of Fredericksburg. A heavy fog
covered  the low ground until mid-morning of the  13th  when
the  battle  got under way. Longstreet held the  Confederate
left  on  Marye's  Heights, opposed by  Sumner  and  Hooker.
Jackson  held the right where the slope was much less  steep
and he was opposed by Franklin.
About  11.30 am the first attack went in at Marye's Heights.
Longstreet had deployed in a strong, barricaded position  in
a  sunken road and the attack was bloodily repulsed. After a
pause  it came back, failed, came back and then failed again
without  a  soldier  having  got  within  50  yards  of  the
Confederate  position. On the opposite wing,  Meade's  small
division  managed to break through the Confederate  line  by
trudging  through an unguarded bog, but they were  massacred
by a strong counter-attack.
After this double failure there was a pause, then about 4.00
pm Sumner and Hooker were ordered to continue the assault on
Marye's  Heights  and three more attacks went  in,  with  as
little  success  as before. By 6.00 pm, well  after  sunset,
Hooker  himself finally called a halt without  reference  to
his  superior. "Finding that I had lost as many  men  as  my
orders  required me to lose" he wrote sarcastically  in  his
battle report "I suspended the attack".
Apart  from some minor artillery work on the following  day,
that  was the end of the battle. Burnside wanted to continue
the  assault but his subordinates persuaded him against  it.
The  14th  was  a  day  of truce and on  the  15th  Burnside
retreated under cover of a storm. All Burnside had  achieved
was  the  official casualty totals of 12,653 Union to  5,309
Confederate  and  this latter was reduced  by  more  than  a
thousand when it was discovered that many independent-minded
Southern soldiers had taken advantage of the confusion to go
home for Christmas.

PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION.  A good sub-title for this scenario would be  No  Way
Out.  The  Confederate  position  behind  Fredericksburg  is
virtually  impregnable and the Rebs are only  slightly  more
vulnerable further south on the flat between Lee's Hill  and
Hamilton  Crossing. If you discover a way to work  the  Rebs
out of their defences and/or drive them off Marye's Heights,
let me know!

CONFEDERATE.  It's  party time! The only danger  confronting
the  troops  defending the Stonewall is boredom;  i.e.  they
will  get  tired of killing blue-bellies. It is possible  to
get  into trouble further south if you get too reckless  and
expose  your  men on open ground. Beware of  the  stationary
Union  reserve artillery deployed on the east  bank  of  the
Rappahannock.  Come within range and you'll  get  chewed  up
pretty bad.

SCENARIO VARIANT
(a).   Burnside's  only  conceivable  chance  of   capturing
Fredericksburg  would have been if he had managed  to  catch
the  Rebs  by surprise. We can simulate this by  making  the
Rebs  encamped when the scenario begins. Go to  the  <SETUP>
menu  and  enter a value of 1 for the South on the  Encamped
line.

THE BATTLE OF CHANCELLORSVILLE
2nd-4th May, 1863
In  conception,  and  to  a  certain  extent  in  execution,
Chancellorsville was one of the most elegant battles of  the
Civil  War  despite  being fought in an  awkward  tangle  of
vegetation  known  as  the  Wilderness.  It  involved  three
extensive  turning  movements with first Lee,  then  Hooker,
then  Lee again being obliged to change front and manoeuvre.
Hooker's total force of 130,000 was more than twice the size
of Lee's.
Despite  its  ignominious  conclusion,  Hooker's  plan   was
excellent.   Having  sent  his  cavalry  to   attack   Lee's
communications  he crossed upriver with  a  force  of  about
60,000:  Couch's  corps crossing at United States  Ford  and
Slocum,  Howard  and  Meade  crossing  further  upstream  at
Kelly's  Ford.  Sedgwick simultaneously crossed  just  below
Fredericksburg   on  pontoon  bridges  and   established   a
bridgehead.  On 30th April Hooker paused at Chancellorsville
to  order Sickles' corps to join him from the left, bringing
his force to over 75,000.
Looking at Sedgwick's bridgehead, Lee guessed that the  main
attack  would be from upstream and was obliged to leave  his
prepared  positions, sending Jackson to re-inforce  Anderson
and  McLaws who were holding the line there. However, on 1st
May,  when  Union and Confederate forces marched  into  each
other, Hooker unaccountably failed to press forward and fell
back on Chancellorsville.
The following day, it was Hooker who was turned, for Jackson
had  taken a circuitous route south to attack Hooker's right
flank  near the Wilderness Church. Due to the delays of  the
march,  Jackson was not able to attack until after  5.00  pm
and  while  it  drove the flank inwards, Hooker's  army  was
still  intact  at  sunset,  two hours  later.  In  a  tragic
accident,  Jackson was wounded in the left arm  by  his  own
men, from complications of which he died a week later.
May 3rd saw Hooker's army contracting in an ever-diminishing
arc,  towards the U. S. Mine Ford. The withdrawal was mostly
directed  by  Couch as Hooker had been temporarily  disabled
when a shell caused a section of his headquarters to descend
upon  him. Lee occupied Chancellorsville at about  10.00  am
and  was preparing a further assault when he was turned  for
the second time.
The  cause was Sedgwick who, after hard fighting, had driven
Early  from  Marye's  Heights and was now  marching  towards
Lee's rear. Lee was forced to send McLaws with 7,000 men  to
slow  him down which he managed to do, holding Sedgwick east
of the Salem Church overnight. In the morning Lee, realising
that  Hooker  had  gone completely onto the defensive,  left
Jackson's  corps (now under Stuart) to hold  him  and  moved
against  Sedgwick's position. He could not  shift  him  from
Bank's Ford however, across which he escaped that night.
Lee  moved  back  against Hooker, who still outnumbered  him
from  a  strong defensive position. But Hooker's  nerve  had
gone  and he too retreated back across the Rappahannock.  As
he said later "For once, I lost confidence in Joe Hooker".

PLAYER'S NOTES
UNION. For the first time since Antietam, the Union has  the
Confederate  army in a position where it can  be  destroyed.
Your  corps commanders are mostly capable and your men ready
and keen to avenge the previous year's disasters. Develop  a
steady  attack along the whole front and be ready to unleash
your main attack when it becomes clear where Jackson is. You
have  many more men than your opponent and more than  enough
time  to get the job done. There is a small chance that  one
or  both  sides will receive reinforcements from  the  east.
Above all, don't emulate Hooker and hide under a tree!

CONFEDERATE. Hooker's bold manoeuvring has placed  the  Army
of Northern Virginia in dire peril. It is in imminent danger
of  being  crushed from east and west. The day  begins  with
Jackson's  corps  moving into place for  a  fierce  counter-
attack.  Whether you go ahead with this attack or otherwise,
the main body will have to hold on grimly in the face of  an
overwhelming opponent. Should Sedgwick's men appear from the
east,  your  doom  is assured. If Early arrives  first  (and
especially  if Sedgwick doesn't arrive at all), you  chances
will improve considerably.

SCENARIO VARIANT
(a).  Jubal  Early  had  been given  the  job  of  screening
Fredericksburg  against an attempted  breakout.  Assume  the
Federals  had  been under the command of a less  adventurous
soldier  and  that  they had stayed put in  their  bivouacs.
Remove  all of Sedgwick's troops from the data base.  Change
the likelihood value for all of Early's troops to 7.

Run 5 Magazine
Additional  scenarios  have been published  in  our  support
magazine,  Run  5.  Each issue contains  at  least  two  new
scenarios   for  our  various  game  systems  as   well   as
suggestions on game play, variations to existing  scenarios,
order  of battle information for scenario designers,  errata
(features?) and historical articles. The magazine is a  very
useful tool for anyone interested in getting more from their
original  investment in the game. Subscription  details  are
provided on a separate enclosure.
