DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR
Strategic Studies Group (SSG)
SCENARIOS (VOL III)

WILDERNESS
May 5 - 6, 1864
Fought  in  the tangle of undergrowth that had  overset  Joe
Hooker,  the  battle of Wilderness was a  total  and  bloody
confusion. Normally steady troops often broke and  ran  when
unexpected attacks broke out of tangled vegetation a bare 20
yards  away and on both sides units tended to become  mixed,
making the transmission of orders difficult.
Three  main roads led into the Wilderness from the west  and
south-west:  the Turnpike and Plank Roads from  Orange,  and
the  Catharpin Road from Gordonsville. Ewell was ordered  to
take  his  corps along the plank road and form  a  defensive
position and wait for Hill, on the Plank Road and Longstreet
on  the Catharpin to arrive. Longstreet had much farther  to
travel than the other two.
Ewell  deployed  successfully and ran into  Warren's  corps.
Initially,  Ewell's  forward  brigade  was  routed  but  the
attackers were soon outflanked and routed in their turn. Two
more  blue  divisions were surprised and  driven  off,  some
fleeing  into Confederate lines so completely had they  lost
their  sense of direction. Ewell did not advance beyond  his
original position and spent the afternoon digging in.
Hill,  coming slightly later up the plank road,  made  heavy
contact  with Hancock who had been given orders to backtrack
from  the  Catharpin  Road to deal  with  him.  The  terrain
decisively  favoured the Confederate defenders  but  it  was
still  25,000  versus 7,500 and Hancock would probably  have
broken through were it not for the fall of darkness.
Both commanders were planning attacks for the following day.
Grant  sent  Burnside  to fill the gap  between  Warren  and
Hancock and Warren was to keep Ewell occupied while the main
attack went in on Hill. Lee planned to shift Longstreet from
the  Catharpin  Road to the Plank Road and have  Hill  sidle
north to fill the gap.
Longstreet's  corps  was delayed until well  after  sunrise.
Hill's troops, who had neglected to entrench overnight, were
pushed  back,  although  in good  order,  and  matters  were
getting  critical  when Longstreet's  lead  brigade  finally
arrived. By about 10.00 o'clock, the line had been restored.
There  was  then something of a lull. Grant, at this  point,
had  both flanks exposed and no centre, for Burnside had got
himself  lost  in  the  tangle and was wandering  around  in
circles   with   two   divisions.  Ironically,   by   having
disappeared,  Burnside put in an effective  defence  on  the
right  flank.  Gordon, commanding the Confederate  far  left
brigade repeatedly asked permission to attack the open flank
but was refused because Burnside was unaccounted for.
On the Union left, not only was Hancock's flank open, but an
unfinished  railroad cutting led right up to it.  Longstreet
was  not  the  man to miss such an opportunity and  he  sent
Sorrel with three brigades into the attack. At 11.00  am  he
exploded  into  the  Union flank with  dynamic  results.  As
Hancock  said  to Longstreet years later "You rolled  me  up
like a wet blanket."
The Confederate units had become terribly mixed-up, however,
and  two  actually started firing on each other.  Longstreet
went forward to stop it and was badly wounded and had to  be
carried  from the field. Command went to General  Field  who
spent  the next four hours sorting the units back into  some
sort of order.
At 6.00 pm Gordon finally got permission to attack the Union
right when Lee himself came up to investigate. Burnside  had
by  this time found the centre opposite Hill and his phantom
flank  protection worked no longer. Gordon  charged  in  and
started to roll up the flank, but darkness fell before Grant
suffered any major disaster.
The  following day saw both sides entrenched and very little
fighting.  Grant had been decisively beaten,  losing  17,666
casualties to his opponent's 7,800 and being turned on  both
flanks. It was a far worse disaster than Hooker had suffered
on the same ground. Unlike Hooker, however, Grant managed to
avoid  defeat  by  the  simple  expedient  of  refusing   to
acknowledge  it. He marched for Spotsylvania and  Lee  would
have to do his work all over again.
PLAYER'S NOTES
Union. As Grant, your first task is to prevent the advancing
units  of  A. P. Hill's Corps from reaching the Brock  Road.
Only  then  can you afford the luxury of planning  offensive
moves.  The  North  has  the initiative  but  be  ready  for
Longstreet's  arrival on Day 2. If you lose control  of  the
Brock Road you will probably lose the game.
Confederate.  Lee must drive quickly along the Orange  Plank
Road  until  a solid Union line is encountered, then  extend
his  flanks and consolidate. Pushing too hard against  Union
positions that are steadily being reinforced will drain  too
much Southern blood. Place your artillery carefully as there
are  few open areas for its effective employment. (Note that
artillery  units  cannot move through  wilderness  unless  a
track  is  present.) The South can win without  cutting  the
Brock  Road  but  to  do  so you must  dish  out  much  more
punishment than you take.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  Lee commanded the battle from the south and gave Ewell
little guidance apart from instructing him to coordinate his
actions  by reference to the sound of the battle  raging  to
his south. To give Lee a different perspective, we can start
him  on  the northern flank with Ewell. Do this by  changing
the South's Army HQ location to 0,11.
(2).  Each  commander had only a limited  knowledge  of  his
opponent's  forces and strength throughout this  engagement.
To  create  more  uncertainty during the  game,  modify  the
arrival times for the following units, using either or  both
options as you choose:
(a). Longstreet arrives earlier. Change Longstreet's HQ  and
Brigades  arrival  time to Day 1, 11 am and  the  likelihood
value to 5.
(b).  Hancock's arrival uncertain. Subtract 7 from Hancock's
HQ and Brigade arrival times and change likelihood to 2.

SPOTSYLVANIA
May 10 - 12, 1864
After  the  battle of Wilderness, Grant attempted  to  march
around  Lee's  right flank to Spotsylvania  and  thus  place
himself between his opponent and his capital, Richmond. Lee,
however, anticipated the movement and Anderson, leading  the
vanguard,  was  just  in  time  to  hold  off  Grant's  lead
elements.  On  9th  May there was some  skirmishing,  during
which Sedgwick, one of Grant's ablest commanders, was killed
by  a  sniper  but the main activity was Confederate  troops
digging into a strongly fortified position.
Grant  was  left  with  three unpalatable  alternatives.  Do
nothing  (the  McClellan gambit). This would  allow  Lee  to
detach  troops  elsewhere. Manoeuvre around Lee  again  (the
Sherman/Grant  gambit).  This  would  simply  postpone   the
confrontation,  shortening Lee's lines of  communication  in
the   process.  Assault  the  fortifications  (the  Burnside
gambit).  This  would  almost certainly  lead  to  a  bloody
repulse.
To  one of Grant's temperament, option three was really  the
only  choice despite the risks. A major assault was  planned
for  5  pm. Warren appealed for permission to attack  early,
believing  he  saw the possibility of a breakthrough.  Grant
let him have his head but Warren was repulsed in what was to
prove the pattern of the day.
Colonel Emory Upton, however, came up with a plan to assault
on  a narrow front in 4 lines, not returning fire until  the
entrenchments were reached. He achieved a penetration but  a
supporting action by Wright's Division was routed and  Upton
had to fight his way out again.
Nevertheless, Grant was impressed with the idea and  planned
to  repeat  the  whole  manoeuvre on  a  grand  scale  using
Hancock's  Corps. The 11th was spent in preparation  and  on
the  12th,  the  attack went in. Hancock was to  attack  the
salient  frontally, supported by Burnside to  the  east  and
Wright  to  the west. Warren was to attack further  west  in
order to tie up more of Lee's troops.
Initially, the attack succeeded well. An intelligence  error
had  led  Lee  to  believe  that Grant  was  retreating  and
consequently the 22 guns in the salient had been  withdrawn.
General Edward Johnson ordered them back again but they were
still  being  moved when the attack went in and  nearly  all
were captured without firing a shot. Three generals, 30 guns
and  a  full  division of men were taken in the first  rush.
However,  the penetration was not smooth, being held  up  by
stubborn pockets of resistance and by the unfamiliar terrain
and  soon  20,000  men were packed into an  extremely  small
area.
A  counter-attack by Gordon slammed into the packed mass  of
men with devastating effect and the assault degenerated into
close  fighting across barricades. The salient, soon  to  be
known  as the "Bloody Angle", was the scene of some  of  the
nastiest and most prolonged fighting in the war. From  early
morning  until  midnight, men fought at arm's length  across
the barricades. The hail of lead was such that an oak, fully
two feet in diameter, was felled by small-arms fire.
Burnside's  supporting attack was a total failure,  his  men
contenting  themselves with long distance sniping.  Wright's
attack went in much more vigorously but his men were held at
the  barricades  and  joined Hancock's Corps  in  the  close
fighting.  Warren's attack, on the Confederate  left  flank,
was  late getting under way and did not close in until 9 am.
It  was  soon  repulsed and this enabled Lee  to  send  more
troops across to the salient.
Despite the long day's fighting, Lee's position held but  at
the cost of about 6,000 killed, wounded or captured. Grant's
total  was  similar  and slightly higher  at  6,820.  As  at
Wilderness, Grant had failed to break Lee's veteran army but
again he refused to concede defeat. After a further week  of
skirmishing he set off again for another rendezvous at  Cold
Harbor.
PLAYER'S NOTES
Union.  Those Southern boys have been busy digging -  facing
you  are  lines  of well-placed breastworks, bristling  with
guns.  Deploy  your  men  and launch the  best  co-ordinated
attack  possible. Force your opponent to commit his reserves
and  hope  you  can crack his lines enough to break  through
with some fresh troops.
Confederate.  As  Lee, the aim is to hold your  ground.  The
"Bloody  Angle" around McCoull's Farm will probably fall  to
Northern  assaults but you should be able to regain  it.  If
things get desperate and the North aren't pressuring you  on
the  west bank of the Po River, create an extra reserve with
either Mahone's or Heth's Divisions.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  Before  the  start of the scenario,  a  flanking  move
carried  out by General Hancock's command along the  eastern
side  of  the map caused Lee to re-deploy Heth on  his  left
flank and move Mahone across the Po River. To re-create  the
original situation, make the following changes:
(a). Add a dawn turn at 4 am on Day 1 and add day-move turns
between this and those already in existence.
(b). Remove Confederate entrenchments from the west bank  of
the  Po  River  and  substitute the  appropriate  underlying
terrain as per the map.
(c). Move Mahone's Division east of the Po River.
(d). Move Heth's Division to positions near Spotsylvania and
change his HQ's Objective to 8.
(e). Change Hancock's orders to OFFENSIVE with Objectives  5
and 6. Change Birney's and Gibbon's orders to OFFENSIVE with
Objectives 5 and 6. Change Barlow's orders to OFFENSIVE with
Objectives 17 and 6.
(2).  A  storm  arrived  during the night  of  11th  causing
lowered  visibility on the following day.  To  create  clear
weather  throughout  this scenario, change  the  Weather  to
CLEAR on Days 2 and 3 and remove all fog.

COLD HARBOR
June 1 - 3, 1864
At  the  end of May 1864, Grant attempted to move  his  army
around Lee and the Army of Northern Virginia to Cold Harbor.
On  31st May, a day-long cavalry battle between Sheridan and
FitzLee took place and Sheridan managed to take Cold Harbor.
He  was  not convinced he could hold it for long but  direct
orders from Grant and Meade told him to do his best.
Lee  had anticipated Grant's movement and planned to  attack
and  defeat  the  northern army in detail as  it  moved  up,
starting with Sheridan's troopers. Lee himself, however, was
suffering from an abdominal complaint and was unable to take
the  field  personally  and in his absence  the  attack  was
bungled.
On  the  morning  of  1st June, Kershaw's division  attacked
Sheridan's  cavalry. The lead brigade was commanded  by  the
inexperienced Col Keitt who led the charge in  gallant  1861
style  and promptly perished in a hail of bullets. His  men,
who  had  spent the last two years in soft garrison  duties,
fled  at the sight and the veteran troops on the flanks were
obliged  to  give back also. The attack degenerated  into  a
panic retreat.
By  midday,  Wright arrived with three divisions to  relieve
Sheridan  and  dug in. Lee was obliged to call  off  further
attacks.  Towards sunset, Meade pushed Smith's and  Wright's
divisions  forward into jumping-off points for the following
day's attack.
The attack did not happen on 2nd because Hancock's Corps did
not  arrive until 6.30 am, two hours late, and they were too
tired  from  their long night march to assault  immediately.
The  attack was then set for 5 pm but Confederate activities
on  the flanks, including the taking of Turkey Hill, decided
Grant to postpone it until the 3rd.
Grant was convinced that Lee's army was almost finished  and
this caused him to plan the attack carelessly. Little or  no
provision  was  made for communication or co-ordination  and
virtually  no  reconnaissance  was  carried  out.  The  men,
however,  were  deeply pessimistic about their  chances  and
many  spent  the evening sewing pieces of paper  with  their
names  on  onto  their coats so that their bodies  might  be
identified.
Their  pessimism was fully warranted and the  attack  was  a
massacre. It ran into carefully prepared fields of fire  and
few   men   made   it  anywhere  near  the  barricades.   In
approximately  eight minutes the attack  had  been  bloodily
repulsed and that was it. Grant ordered further assaults but
the  local  commanders to a man chose to interpret  this  to
mean a stepped-up rate of fire only. None would advance into
the  certain  death awaiting them in front.  Eventually,  at
1.30 pm Grant gave in and suspended the assault order.
Casualties  for  the battle were 1500 Confederate  and  7000
Union, most of the latter having been incurred in the  first
few  minutes  of  the  charge. With uncharacteristic  gloom,
Grant  remarked "I regret this assault more than any  one  I
ever ordered". Up at the sharp end, regret was even greater.
A  diary  recovered from one of the Union corpses  held  the
following entry: "June 3. Cold Harbor. I was killed."
PLAYER'S NOTES
Union. At Cold Harbor, Grant faced an interlocking system of
trenches  and  fieldworks that would, with the  addition  of
barbed wire and machine guns, have been right at home on any
WWI  battlefield.  Heavy  losses  are  unavoidable  and  the
careful coordination of attacking brigades is essential  for
any  chance  of  a  Northern (Pyrrhic!)  victory.  Choose  a
valuable  victory hex as your primary objective and  attempt
to  maximise victory points gained against troop losses. And
don't  forget to pin a name tag to the back of your  coat  -
just in case!
Confederate.  The first day will probably see a  penetration
into  your lines around New Cold Harbor. When reinforcements
arrive,  concentrate  on regaining the  fortification  lines
with   deliberate,  well-timed  attacks  on   the   fatigued
Federals.  Position the artillery brigade to best  advantage
as  the Union attack develops. It can give you a significant
edge if used properly.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  The Scenario varies from history by allowing Hancock's
Corps  to  arrive fresh and ready for battle on  day  2.  In
reality  this unit arrived in such an exhausted  state  that
Grant  was forced to postpone his attack until the following
day. To recreate this situation, make the following changes.
(a). Replace the END at dusk on Day 2 with MOVE
(b).  Give all of Hancock's Brigades (#58 - #68 and  #76)  a
cohesion of 4
(c).  Change  Hancock's  Corps and  Division  HQ  orders  to
RESERVE, with no set objectives
(d). Make the North defensive on Day 2
(e).  Add  2 to the fort value of all Southern and  Northern
breastworks.
This  should  result  in  the historical  crushing  Southern
victory.
(2).  The timely arrival of Hill's Corps saved the  day  for
the  South.  To give the North a real chance, change  Hill's
Corps HQ and all his brigade's (#22 - #34) likelihood values
to 5, thereby delaying their arrival.

ATLANTA
July 22, 1864
In  replacing  Johnston  with  Hood,  the  Confederate  High
Command expected an aggressive approach to Sherman's advance
on Atlanta. In this regard, Hood did not fail to deliver. On
July  20th he made a sortie which became known as the Battle
of Peachtree Creek. Launched against the rock-steady Thomas,
it  achieved  little  but  on the  following  day  Wheeler's
cavalry  reported  that McPherson, on the  Union  left,  had
neglected to protect his flank. Hood saw an opportunity here
for a decisive victory and sent Hardee on a circuitous night
march,  with orders to attack the exposed flank at dawn.  He
withdrew  the rest of his troops to Atlanta's inner defences
and  sent  Wheeler to attack Decatur and the  Union  baggage
train.
Things did not go completely according to plan due partly to
bad luck and partly to bad management. There were delays  in
the process of disengagement and it was not until 3 am. that
the   last   of   Hardee's  corps  had  left   the   Atlanta
entrenchments.  The  men were also  tired  after  the  heavy
fighting  on 20th and skirmishing on 21st. It was not  until
noon,  therefore, that Hardee arrived at his  objective  and
launched the attack.
The  results were variable. Maney's division went in too far
to  the left and hit an entrenched position. Cleburne,  next
in  line,  was  much more successful and made a  substantial
penetration. On the right, however, Bate and Walker ran into
an  unexpected defence. An entire Union corps, under  Dodge,
had spent the morning engaged in destroying the railroad  to
the  north  and was marching back as Bate and  Walker  moved
forward.  They immediately faced left and the column  turned
into a long defensive line.
McPherson, one of the North's most able generals, was killed
in  the battle. He was at headquarters with Sherman when  he
heard firing and went to investigate. He ran into Cleburne's
men and was shot down as he tried to ride away. Sherman sent
few  re-inforcements  across, wanting  to  give  McPherson's
veterans a chance for revenge.
His  faith  in  them was warranted. There was hard  fighting
around  Bald  Hill,  held by Leggett but the  gallant  corps
commander  Logan took command of McPherson's  army  and  the
critical point held. At the end of the day, Hood had nothing
to  show  for  his  efforts except for 8,000  casualties  to
Sherman's  3,700.  Unlike  Johnston,  Hood  did  not   fully
appreciate  that aggression was not necessarily  the  better
part of valour.
PLAYER'S NOTES
Union.  You  begin the game with your southern flank  turned
and  your  first job is to stabilise it. Fuller  and  Sweeny
will  probably  need  help but don't over-react,  as  Hood's
attack  from  Atlanta  must be dealt  with  as  it  arrives.
General McPherson was killed during this battle, largely due
to  his  moving around the field without an adequate escort.
As  the  Northern commander we recommend that  you  be  more
sensible in your command profile.
Confederate. Hood begins the game at his HQ in  the  Atlanta
fortifications.  He has the option to wait until  Hardee  is
engaged and then control Cheatham's Corps or to move to  the
southern flank and direct Hardee's units as they drive  into
the  Northern rear. Either choice is valid and as the action
unfolds, success can depend on whether you are in the  right
place at the right time.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  Just  after McPherson ordered Dodge's Corps to  deploy
south  protecting his exposed flank, Sherman commanded Dodge
to  move east and destroy the railroad lines around Decatur.
McPherson persuaded Sherman to withdraw his orders and  thus
prevented   Hood's   outflanking   movement   from    having
devastating  effect. To simulate Dodge's removal,  make  the
following changes.
(a). Relocate Dodge's HQ and Brigades to 17,2.
(b).  Change  arrival time to Turn 1 and  likelihood  to  3.
(This  gives this unit a 25% chance of not arriving at  all,
or else arriving with a 2-7 turn delay.)
(2). Hood's plan called for Hardee to be in position for his
attack  at  dawn  but delays on the approach  march  prevent
this.  To  make the battle begin at dawn, enter the briefing
screen  for Day 1 and place a dawn turn at 5 am and add  day
turns as necessary to fill the existing gap. Move Dodge's HQ
and Brigades to 8,3; 9,3; 10,3 and 11,3 respectively.
(3). Historically, Hood delayed the commitment of Cheatham's
Corps.  To  simulate this, change Cheatham's  Corps  HQ  and
Brigades likelihood value to 6.

FRANKLIN
November 30, 1864
After  Sherman  took  Atlanta, Hood obtained  permission  to
launch what was to be a futile expedition into Tennessee. On
28th-29th  Schofield, retreating north, had escaped  from  a
trap, largely due to a mix-up of orders on Hood's side. Hood
was  absolutely furious and it is possible that this  warped
his judgement.
He  arrived at Franklin to find Schofield dug in and in  the
process of repairing the bridge across the Harpeth River  so
that  he  could  continue towards Nashville. Two  of  Hood's
seven divisions were still well to the rear, as well as  all
but  eight of his guns, so he had with him about 30,000 men.
Schofield   was  entrenched  with  34,000   and   60   guns.
Furthermore,  there was two miles of open plain  before  the
town.  Hood's  subordinates were aghast when  he  ordered  a
general  attack but, in the grand tradition  of  Ambrose  E.
Burnside,  he  refused to listen and at 4.00 o'clock,  about
one hour before sunset, the attack went in.
Initially  the  attack  went surprisingly  well,  due  to  a
mistake on the Union side. Wagner had two of his brigades in
a forward position across the turnpike, about half a mile in
front  of the main defences. As Hood's army started  forward
Wagner neglected to send a message ordering the two brigades
to  retreat  and  the  colonels in charge  delayed  to  fire
volleys into the approaching enemy.
They left their retreat too late and were swamped and routed
by  the  oncoming charge. As they ran back,  Cheatham's  and
Brown's  divisions followed in close pursuit and  were  thus
shielded   from   hostile  fire.   They   broke   into   the
entrenchments  and  tried to turn  the  guns  there  on  the
defenders  but  the  horses  had bolted  with  the  primers.
Suddenly,  tired  from having run half a  mile,  they  found
themselves under fire from about two dozen guns and when the
reserve, under Opdycke, charged in, they were forced to fall
back and try to find cover outside the works.
This was the high point of the attack. French, Walthall  and
Loring, attacking the Union left, were caught in heavy  fire
from  across  the  river from Fort Granger and  from  masked
batteries,  and  in  small arms fire from entrenched  troops
armed with repeating rifles. At 7.00 pm, an hour after  full
darkness, Hood committed the reserves but although  fighting
went on until 9.00 o'clock nothing was achieved.
Schofield  retreated during the night and Hood  had  wrecked
his  army.  Six generals were killed, including  the  highly
competent  Cleburne,  one captured and five  badly  wounded.
6,252   veterans  were  casualties,  including  1,750  dead.
Schofield had suffered 2,326 casualties and was falling back
on re-inforcements. Hood continued the pursuit to Nashville,
to  lose  heavily in a battle with Thomas on 15th  December,
but  essentially,  any hope of a successful  campaign  ended
here at Franklin.
PLAYER'S NOTES
Union. Initially, the Northern commander must decide whether
to sacrifice Wagner's Division and buy a little more time or
attempt  to minimise losses by withdrawing them before  they
are over-run. Once the Southern attack commences in earnest,
try  to  keep some reserve brigades ready to plug any  gaps.
Steadfast defence is the key to success at Franklin.
Confederate. For the South to succeed, a carefully  planned,
co-ordinated  attack  is essential.  The  concentrated  fire
power  of  entrenched Federals can easily shatter  the  most
gallant of Southern brigades. Piecemeal attacks will hand  a
victory to your enemy, tarnishing your reputation as an  up-
and-coming Confederate commander.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).  Most of Hood's artillery was not in position  for  use
during  the  attack. This explains the lack of guns  in  the
majority of Southern brigades. To give the rebels their full
complement of artillery, edit the Franklin OB by giving  all
brigades  the same battery strengths and artillery types  as
in the Nashville scenario (brigades #1 - #27).
(2).  Wood's  Division  took no part  in  the  fighting  and
remained north of the Franklin River. To give them a  chance
of  arrival, subtract 7 from the arrival value and  enter  a
likelihood value of 3 for Union brigades #54, #55 and #56.

NASHVILLE
December 15 - 16, 1864
Following  his  disastrous defeat at  Franklin,  Hood  still
declined  to see the folly of his ways and continued  on  to
Nashville  where  Thomas was heavily entrenched  with  about
55,000 men. As Hood's own army was now composed of less than
40,000  it was difficult to see what he could do.  The  only
plan  he could come up with was to dig in outside Nashville,
hope  that  Thomas would attack him and that he  could  then
repulse Thomas and follow up into Nashville.
Thomas  was not the most impulsive of men, however,  and  he
watched   unconcerned,  well  supplied  behind  his   strong
defences,  as the ill-supplied Confederate army shivered  in
its trenches in the bleak December weather. Still, if Thomas
was in no hurry, his superiors were and he received a stream
of   telegrams,   urging  him,  with  varying   degrees   of
politeness, to advance. A cold snap turned the ground to ice
on  8th but a thaw on 13th at last enabled him to manoeuvre.
On  15th  December he struck. His plan was elegantly simple.
Steedman  would  demonstrate  against  Hood's  right,  where
Cheatham was in command. Everyone else would execute a large
scale  left  wheel  and smash into Hood's left,  rolling  up
Stewart's  Corps.  As  Hood had somewhat  unwisely  detached
Forrest's cavalry to deal with the Murfreesboro garrison  it
seemed quite likely that the movement would succeed.
It  did,  although  not  perfectly. Heavy  fog  delayed  the
initial  movement  and  it  was not  until  8  o'clock  that
Steedman  went in. His attack met a stubborn resistance  and
was repulsed but it was not expected to succeed in any case.
By  noon,  Thomas had some 48,000 men lined up and ready  to
attack   on  Hood's  left.  Stewart's  Corps,  depleted   by
detachments and casualties, was only about one tenth of that
number.
Several   outlying  redoubts,  however,  put  up   a   stiff
resistance and it was not until after 4.00 pm that the  left
wing  collapsed.  The  retreat  was  not  a  rout  and  Hood
succeeded  in forming a new line, some two miles  back  from
the first and his remaining soldiers spent the night digging
in. Hood still refused to run away.
The  following day was initially fairly quiet  while  Thomas
got  his army reorganised. Hood had also changed around  his
corps  and  now Stephen Lee was holding the right,  Cheatham
the  left  and  Stewart the centre. Lee  had  scarcely  been
engaged  the  previous  day and his men  held  firm  against
attacks by Wood and Steedman. But on the left, Cheatham  was
in trouble for Wilson had got his cavalry around behind him,
cutting off his line of retreat.
Finally,  about  4  o'clock,  the  artillery  rain  stopped,
Schofield  and  Smith  went in and the Confederate  position
fell apart. Only a rallying action by Lee prevented the army
from  being  completely overwhelmed.  In  the  two  days  of
fighting,  Hood had lost about 1,500 killed or  wounded  and
4,500 taken prisoner. Thomas had lost about 3,000. Hood  had
finally  completed the destruction of his army,  begun  with
the futile attacks at Atlanta five months earlier.
PLAYER'S NOTES
Union.  Thomas has manoeuvred into an excellent position  to
outflank  Hood's  lines.  To complete  this  fine  piece  of
generalship you must drive for Shy's Hill and attempt to cut
the  Southerners  off from their line of retreat  along  the
Franklin Pike. Keep your men moving but don't push too  hard
as  some  fresh  troops may be needed to pry any  entrenched
rebels loose from those vital southern objectives.
Confederate. As Hood, you start the game at HQ, well to  the
rear.  Initial HQ placement is critical to your  control  of
the  situation.  The  majority of your  first  line  is  now
useless  so you should aim to form a second line of  defence
anchored  on Shy's Hill and stretching to Overton  Hill.  To
win,  the South must minimise troop losses and grimly defend
the Franklin Pike.
SCENARIO VARIANTS
(1).   Forrest's  cavalry  corps  was  not   recalled   from
Murfreesboro early enough to reach Nashville in time for the
battle. A composite division under Jackson has been included
in  the OB with a very low likelihood of arrival. To improve
Hood's  chances of early cavalry reinforcement,  change  the
arrival  time  of  Brigades 30, 31 and 32  to  4,  5  and  6
respectively and change their likelihoods to 3.
(2).  The arrival of two Southern Corps commanders (Cheatham
and  S.  D. Lee) is delayed. This allows a better simulation
of  the  initially uncoordinated Southern withdrawal towards
their  lines  of communication when it became apparent  that
their  entrenched line was totally outflanked. To  give  the
Southern  player more control, change the arrival times  for
S. D. Lee and Cheatham to 0.
