DECISIVE BATTLES OF THE CIVIL WAR
Strategic Studies Group (SSG)
TUTORIAL (VOL III)

LEARNING TO PLAY THE GAME
After  the  fall of Atlanta, Confederate General  John  Bell
Hood  obtained  permission to march his army into  Tennessee
and  harass the Union forces and Sherman's supply lines.  He
chased  Union  General John M. Schofield  north  across  the
State  as  Schofield tried desperately to link up  with  the
main force under Thomas at Nashville.
At  Franklin, Schofield found the bridge across the  Harpeth
River was down so he was obliged to dig in while he repaired
it.  Hood  arrived before he could complete the  bridge  and
attempted  an immediate assault to try and take  Schofield's
force before it escaped.
John  Schofield was in a stronger position than he realised,
however,  and  his  men  managed to withstand  Hood's  fury,
despite some initial penetration of their lines.
You  are  invited, in this tutorial, to take on the role  of
John B. Hood. You will command the Army of Tennessee and see
if  you  can  do  better  than this  aggressive  Confederate
leader. Your computer will command the Union Forces.
As well as this manual, you'll need to have the data card in
front of you.

(a). Starting Up
Start  up  your computer using the procedure  given  on  the
start  side of the menu card. Menu A (Start Up Menu) appears
to  the  right of the title page. As is the case with  every
menu  in  the  game, you use the arrow keys to  locate  your
choice  from the menu and then type (RET) to select it.  IBM
users  may  alternatively use a function key to  locate  and
select a menu item. The <SET-UP> line in Menu A is the third
line in the menu; therefore f3 will select it. Similarly, f4
will select the <GOTO DOS> line.
If  you select the wrong menu, don't worry. Apple II and IBM
users  type (ESC) to go back to the previous menu;  C-64/128
users type (f1). IBM and Apple II users should note that the
(DEL) key will serve as the (ESC) key in most situations.
IBM  users can turn the sound on/off through Menu 12 of  the
Game Routines. Apple II and C-64 users should type Cntl  (S)
to turn on/off the sound. Apple II and C-64 users with a B&W
monitor should type Cntl (B).

(b). Selecting the Franklin Scenario
Before  we  can start play, we have to select  the  Franklin
scenario,  tell the computer that we will control the  South
forces and decide which game options we wish to use.
Use  either  arrow key to locate the <GAME>  line  and  type
(RET) to go to Menu B (Location Select). At this point,  IBM
owners using 5.25" floppy disks should remove Disk One  from
the drive and replace it with Disk Two. Apple II owners with
one disk drive should remove the game disk, turn it over and
put it back in the drive.
Use  an  arrow  key to locate the <SCENARIO> line  and  type
(RET) to go to Menu C (Scenario Menu).
Use  an  arrow  key to locate the <FRANKLIN> line  and  type
(RET)  to go to Menu E (Edit Utility). The scenario briefing
screen  is  displayed to the left of the  menu  window.  IBM
users must select the <LOAD GAME> line and then position the
cursor over the <Franklin> line and type (RET).
Use an arrow key to locate the <EDIT> line and type (RET) to
go  to  Menu N (Game Options). There are two (IBM) or  three
(Apple  II  and C-64) options available when  you  play  the
game.
(i). Exposed. When the exposed flag is set, all units on the
map will be visible at all times. If the exposed flag is not
set,  only  currently sighted units will be visible  on  the
battlefield.
(ii).  Enhanced (Apple II and C-64 Only). When the  enhanced
flag  is  set,  computer controlled  forces  will  be  given
certain  bonuses.  For  example, unit size,  leadership  and
staff ratings may be increased.
(iii).  Radio.  When the radio flag is set,  you  will  have
automatic communications with every unit in your command. If
the  radio  flag  is  not  set, only  those  units  directly
attached to the army HQ and within communications range  can
be given orders.
For tutorial purposes, we will choose to set the exposed and
radio flags but leave the enhanced flag alone. Position  the
cursor on the <EXPOSED> line and type (RET). The cursor will
return  automatically to the <CONTINUE> line. Select <RADIO>
in the same way. Select <CONTINUE> to go to Menu F (Handicap
Utility).  An Options in Effect box has appeared  below  the
menu  window showing that the exposed and radio  flags  have
been set.
Since  this  is  only a tutorial, we will give  ourselves  a
break. The handicaps below the <NO EFFECT> line benefit  the
South,  those  above  benefit the North.  The  effect  of  a
handicap is to modify the victory point awards, it does  not
affect  the  artificial intelligence nor the composition  of
the  forces. Note that the handicap structure for IBM  users
asks  you  to  select a veteran, normal or novice  opponent.
Select  a  novice.  AII/C64 users select the  <MAJOR>  south
line.
You  have  been processed through to Menu G (Player Select).
Locate the <SOUTH> line and type (RET). The cursor has  been
thrown into the briefing screen and you have the opportunity
to  change  the  commanders' names. Do  this  if  you  wish,
otherwise  type  (RET) until you get back to  Menu  E  (Edit
Utility).
Have  a last look at the briefing screen and you'll see  the
South  has  a  major handicap advantage (IBM users  will  be
opposed by a novice computer general), the North forces will
be  run by the computer and the exposed and radio flags  are
set.
At  this  time,  if you wish, you can observe  the  computer
playing  against itself. This will give you an idea  of  the
flow  of  the game and how the combat and movement mechanics
work.  Use  the <EDIT> line of Menu E to return  to  Menu  G
(Player Select) and select <OBSERVE>.
Use  an arrow key to locate the <START> line and type  (RET)
to go to Menu H (Game Master).
That's  the preliminaries over with. We're just about  ready
to play.
Turn your menu card over to the game side.

(c). The First Turn
This  tutorial is a brief introduction as to  how  the  game
plays.  It is not intended to be a description of everything
that  can  happen. The Game Manual describes in  detail  the
full  use  of each menu. Once you have some experience  with
the  game menus, we recommend you read Chapter 5 in the Game
Manual   for  an  explanation  of  the  major  game  systems
controlled by the computer.
Back  to  Menu H. A current turn briefing appears above  the
menu window. The date is 30th November 1864, it is 11 am and
this is the first of the eleven turns in the game. Below the
menu  window you can see it is daylight and the  weather  is
clear.
The  map shows two Union units towards the top of the screen
and  a  single Confederate unit at the bottom. Don't  panic!
More units are on their way.
The  <NORTH>  and  <RUN  5> lines  in  the  menu  have  been
overprinted with a solid bar to show that you cannot  access
them.  The  solid bar will disappear from the <RUN  5>  line
after  the <SOUTH> line has been accessed. This is to  guard
against  accidentally selecting <RUN 5> before issuing  your
orders.  The <NORTH> line will always be overprinted  during
the  game. The computer does not want you to see what it  is
doing!
Locate the <SOUTH> line and type (RET). This brings up  Menu
2  (Operations  Master). Your choices here  are  <PERSONAL>,
<COMMAND>,  <ORDER>, <RESIGN> or <OPTIONS>, <MAP  WALK>  and
<ROSTER> (IBM Only).
On  the  first  turn  only,  the <PERSONAL>,  <COMMAND>  and
<ORDER> lines are overprinted. This is because General Hood,
the figure you represent, does not arrive on the field until
the third turn.
The  map  has  not changed, just the information  above  and
below the menu window. Above the menu window you can see the
army I.D. Below the menu window you are given a casualty and
victory point summary. The VPs show what your score would be
if the game was to end at this moment.
The  <PERSONAL>, <COMMAND> and <ORDER> lines are  the  menus
you  use  to  give orders to your forces, the <RESIGN>  line
ends the game immediately and the <MAP WALK> line allows you
to  review  your  forces, enemy forces, the battlefield  and
objectives.  The <ROSTER> line displays your complete  Order
of Battle.

(d). Reviewing Your Forces
Before  issuing  orders we'll examine the  battlefield,  the
objectives and the enemy forces.
Select  the <MAP WALK> line to go to Menu 3. The screen  has
centred  on  a hollow, flashing cursor. Use the arrow  keys,
the  I,  J, K and M or the 1-6 keys to move the cursor  over
the  map.  The map will scroll once the cursor  reaches  the
edge. Type (0) to centre the screen on the cursor.
At the very bottom of the information panel, you will see  a
three-part icon display. From left to right this  shows  you
the  type of terrain in the hex, which sections of  the  map
are  in  use  for this scenario together with  the  relative
position of the cursor and which side currently controls the
hex.  The name of the terrain type appears immediately above
the display.
Move  the cursor to Moselys Hill. It is in the northern half
of  the  map. IBM owners can use the f1 - f9 keys to  scroll
the  map  in large increments. Moselys Hill is an objective.
Its name appears above the terrain type name and its victory
point details are described.
Move  the  cursor  to any one of the Union brigades  in  the
northern  half of the battlefield. The icons at the  top  of
the  information  panel tell you it is an  infantry  brigade
while  below that you are told its formation and  condition.
Note that one of the units is Schofield's HQ.
Type (RET) to bring up the map display menu. Select <ROADS>;
all  roads are removed from the map. Type (RET) to bring  up
the  menu  again  then select <ROADS> to  replace  the  road
network.
<CONTROL> allows you to see which side controls a particular
hex. <CLEAR> removes all units on the map so you can see the
terrain underneath.
Objectives can be selected either by using the arrow keys to
cycle through them or entering the objective name.
Friendly units can be located by entering their name.
Move  the cursor to the Confederate cavalry brigade  at  the
bottom  of  the map. This is Biffle's cavalry  brigade  from
Chalmers' division. The information provided is mostly  self
explanatory; more details are available in Chapter 5 of  the
Game Manual.
We  can't actually give any orders yet until our HQ arrives.
Go back to Menu H and select <RUN 5> to end the first turn.
Turn  2 you will find is much the same as turn 1. Your enemy
is  organising  his forces while all you  can  do  is  check
things  out  with your cavalry. Life is like this sometimes!
After  making  any investigations you wish  using  the  <MAP
WALK> function, go back to Menu H and select <RUN 5> again.

(e). Subsequent Operations
By  now your forces should be flooding on. Most importantly,
Hood himself (you!) should have arrived.
Go  back  to menu 2. The <PERSONAL> line is the place  where
you must decide where to put your army HQ and how personally
involved  you  want  to get in the battle. Select<PERSONAL>.
Below  you  menu  window  you will  see  that  your  current
condition is OK. In the battle you can get captured, wounded
or even killed!
Select  <PROFILE> and you will be presented  with  the  four
profiles  you  may choose from. You may change your  profile
each  turn. Your profile will not change from turn  to  turn
unless  you enter this menu and change it. You always  begin
with  the  default value set to <SENSIBLE>. The  words  here
mean  pretty  much  what they say. Heroic will  inspire  all
troops  within four hexes of your position while  increasing
the  likelihood of a nasty accident. Cautious will keep  you
safe  and  sound  but  the effect  on  your  men  may  prove
disastrous.  For  this tutorial, we suggest  you  keep  your
profile on <SENSIBLE>.
Select  <MOVE HQ>. This is the mechanism by which  you  move
your  HQ around the map. <STAND> tells the army HQ to remain
exactly where it is. <CURSOR> gives you access to the cursor
so  that you can use the I,J,K,M keys, the arrow keys or the
1-6  keys  to  move your HQ to the location of your  choice.
Note  that  you  will  not be allowed  to  select  an  enemy
controlled hex as your destination.
<CONTROL> directs the army HQ to move as quickly as possible
to  a  friendly corps HQ for the purpose of placing it under
direct command. Because the radio flag is set, Corps HQs  do
not appear and this line will be overprinted.
<OBJECTIVE>  allows  you  to  chose  an  objective  as   the
destination for the army HQ, using either the arrow keys  or
the name routine.
For the moment, leave your HQ where it is.
Now  that the personal matters have been taken care of, it's
time  to  give  orders to your subordinates.  Type  (ESC/f1)
until you get back to Menu 2 and then select <COMMAND>.  The
<COMMAND>  line  gives  you access to  all  your  corps  and
division commanders presently on the battlefield. Note  that
because  the radio flag is set, Corps headquarters  are  not
present.   Only  division  headquarters  appear  under   the
<COMMAND> line.
Because  the  radio flag is set, you will be  able  to  give
orders to all your division commanders each turn. A list  of
your commanders appears in the menu window. The commander in
the  centre of the window is highlighted and information  on
his  command appears above and below the window.  All  three
have  <OFFENSIVE> commands with two objectives. Don't change
the commands this turn.
Go  back to Menu 2 and select the <ORDER> line. You are  now
able to issue orders to all of your brigades. Again, if  the
radio  flag were not set, the number of brigades  you  would
have access to would be severely restricted. Each brigade is
identified  in  a  small  window  in  the  centre   of   the
information display. Use the arrow keys to cycle through the
brigades so far on the battlefield.
If  either of the cavalry brigades are in contact  with  the
enemy  it  would be better to withdraw them. Locate Biffle's
brigade  and  hit (RET) to bring up the brigade order  menu.
Select  <WITHDRAW>. We don't want to waste our  troopers  at
this stage of the battle.
Go  back  to  menu H and select <RUN 5>. Battle reports  are
presented  one after another and you should tap the  <SPACE>
bar to move on to the next report. A full explanation of the
combat  mechanics  is given in Chapter 5. Basically,  firing
units  are shown as arrows pointing in the direction of  the
target unit.
Once  the  battles are over, the computer will begin  moving
troops.  If  the exposed flag had not been set,  only  those
units visible to each other would have been seen.

(f). What To Do Next
Read  the scenario notes for this battle given later in this
booklet. You have more men than Schofield but must attack  a
very  tough position. This short scenario will give  you  an
ideal opportunity to practice the attack co-ordination vital
to  successful operations against fortifications. Experiment
with  the command and order menus. If you're uncertain about
what  to do, accept the computer's advice and do not  change
the order. Refer to Chapters 4 and 5 when necessary.
