----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                              Geopolitique 1990
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

GETTING STARTED
---------------
What You Need
- Apple II family (48k required)
- Color Monitor or TV
- Single Disk Drive
- Blank, formatted disk for saving games

Loading Instructions
1. Insert Geopolitique 1990 disk, label up, into disk drive and close door or
   latch.
2. Turn on the monitor or TV, and computer.
3. The program will load automatically into your computer's memory.

GAME OPTIONS
------------
Game Control - Both Commodore and Apple versions of the game use the
keyboard to control gameplay.  You will be prompted to type responses to
various questions and make menu selections.

Main Menu - After the game has loaded, the Main Menu will appear.  You may
play the game with the highlighted options, or choose your own game options.
To highlight another game option, press the number of the option you would
like to change.  After choosing your game options, you will be shown a list
of the Soviet Politburo members selected to represent the Soviet Union in
this game. You will then be asked if you would like to start the game.  If
you choose not to start the game, you will be given the opportunity to save
the game options you have chosen to a data disk.

1.  Old Game or New Game - Select Old Game to load a saved game, and follow
the on-screen instructions on loading a game.  Select New Game to start a new
game.

2.  Scenarios - There are seven scenarios from which to choose.

    Major Power Revival -  The United States and Soviet Union attempt to
      recoup their formerly pre-eminent world positions which have been
      eroded by nationalistic and economic pressures in the 1980's.  A
      shortfall in the "post-industrial" technological revolution has reduced
      world industrial productivity.  Neither side has the advantage.  This
      scenario lasts 12 years.

    At The Brink - World re-militarization on a scale not seen since the
      1930's has led to a very tense world situation with high armament levels
      in all nations.  Plentiful energy and metal reserves have been uncovered
      in the 198's, promising a major advantage to the power which can access
      them. Initial U.S. advantages lie in military agreements.  Initial
      Soviet advantages lie in political and economic agreements, and in
      military strength. This scenario lasts 8 years.

    The Atlantic Alliance - A re-emergent NATO alliance, extended in scope to
      include much of Latin America, confronts a hostile East Block and Third
      World. Shortages of raw materials are compounded by matching shortages
      of industrial capacity.  Initial U.S. advantages lie in prestige and
      numerous agreements with Europe and in North and South America. Initial
      Soviet advantages lie in military strength, and in numerous This World
      economic, political and military agreements.  This scenario lasts 10
      years.

    Soviet Renaissance - Following the erosion of Soviet world position in the
      1980's, a newly re-armed and self-confident Soviet Union embarks on a
      campaign to regain lost influence.  Initial U.S. advantages lie in
      several economic and military agreements.  Initial Soviet advantages lie
      in prestige, military strength, and a U.S. Treasury deficit.  This
      scenario lasts 10 years.

    Failure Of The Monroe Doctrine - During the 1980's the U.S. foreign policy
      in the Western Hemisphere meets repeated failure as Socialist and
      Pro-Soviet regimes arise in Latin America and North America.  Surrounded
      by hostile governments with Strong Soviet tendencies, the U.S. attempts
      to re-establish the balance of world power.  U.S. has no initial
      advantages. Initial Soviet advantages lie in numerous agreements with
      Pro-Soviet governments in the Western Hemisphere.  This scenario lasts
      12 years.

    U.S. Renaissance - The Quasi-isolationists U.S. world posture of the 80's
      is replaced by and equally pro-expansionist policy in the 1990's.
      Initial U.S. advantages lie in prestige and military strength.  Initial
      Soviet advantages lie in economic, military nd political agreements.
      This scenario lasts 10 years.

    Confrontation... 1984 - The U.S. and Soviet Union face off in a tense
      global environment patterned after the present-day
      economic/political/military situation.  Initial U.S. advantages lie in
      economic strength.  Initial Soviet advantages lie in prestige and
      military strength.  This scenario lasts 8 years.

3.  Level of Difficulty - There are four levels that determine the ease with
which the U.S. arrives at agreements with minor countries as well as the
initial prestige, industrial capacity, and objectives.  The ability of the
Soviet Union to gain agreements is also affected by this choice as well as the
initial Soviet military and economic strength in GEOWAR.

4.  U.S. Goals - The U.S. player is prompted to list the two most important
U.S. goals from the three available objectives: Economic, Prestige, and
National Security.

GAME SEQUENCE
-------------
Geopolitique 1990 is actually two simulation games in one.  A politically
oriented simulation of a "peaceful" U.S./Soviet struggle to dominate the
world, and a military simulation of World War III.  You can play either
simulation separately, or if your "peaceful" struggle results in war, you can
be tossed into the brutal arena of war.  The victor in the diplomatic phase of
the game is the power which first attains its objectives in terms of Gross
National Product, PRestige and Military Security.

In the military phase of the game, your objective is to survive a world-wide
conventional (non-nuclear) war.  Complicating this already volatile
environment, is the necessity to deal with wartime economics.  If you don't
have the resources to survive war, you'll have to find them from another
source, but at what price?

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                    GEOPOL
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Start the game in the "peaceful" segment of the game, GEOPOL, consisting of a
sequence of economic, political, and military decisions on the part of both
the U.S. player and the Soviet opponent.  Each turn represents one year of
simulated time, beginning with the year 1990.  Each turn follows this sequence
of play:

STRATEGIC DECISION PHASE
------------------------
  This phase begins with a display of each country's relative position with
  respect to their economic, political, and military goals.  After the reports
  are examined, you must decide whether the current situation merits a
  declaration of war on the Soviet Union.  This Soviet Politburo membership
  also evaluates the current situation and decides whether to declare war.  If
  was is declared, play switches to the military portion of the game, GEOWAR.

  In some years, world events occur that may have a bearing on the outcome of
  a player's efforts.  Bulletins describing these events move across the
  bottom of the screen.  Detailed reports are available for the following
  subjects:
   - Military Presence - Each Task Force, made up of three military units, is
     shown on the map.
   - Minor Political Orientation - Circles appear on the map to indicate the
     political orientation of the minor countries. Hollow circles designate
     pro-U.S. alignment; solid circles designate pro-Soviet alignment. One
     solid and one hollow circle designates a neutral country.
   - Major Power Agreements - Agreements are indicated on the map by the
     letters E=economic, P=political, and M=military.

ECONOMIC PLANNING PHASE
-----------------------
  This phase is probably the most important part of GEOPOL.  You control the
  U.S. economy to maximize your future political and military capabilities.
  The three main steps to the Economic Planning Phase are 1) Allocation of
  Industrial Capacity, 2) Raw Material Production, and 3) Secondary Goods
  Production.

    Allocation of Industrial Capacity - The first step in the Economic
      Decision Phase is to determine the number of industrial points to be
      allocated to production of Raw MAterials and Secondary Goods.  When the
      prompt "ENTER IND CAP FOR RAW MAT'L PROD" appears, enter the number of
      industrial points you would like to use towards production of raw
      materials. You may enter from 0 to the total number of points available.
      Any points not used will be available for secondary goods production or
      for raw material production at a later date.

    Raw Material Production - You must now decide how to allocate the
      industrial points amount (among?) the three raw materials: Food, Metal
      and Energy.  When the prompt "ENTER IND(I)/RE or QU" appears, choose
      from the options below.

        1.  IND(I) - (Industrial) Type I to adjust the distribution of
            industrial points among the raw materials,  A prompt will then
            appear asking you to enter the number of industrial capacity
            points you would like to allocate to production of the three raw
            materials: Food (FD), Metal (MTL), and Energy (EN).  Enter the
            three number, separated by commas, representing the desired
            production of these raw materials.  Example: 8,7,12 This
            represents 8 points toward Food production, 7 points towards Metal
            production, and 12 points towards Energy production.  You cannot
            exceed the total number of industrial capacity points available.
        2.  RE (Refresh) Type RE to update the current display to reflect any
            changes made.
        3.  QU (Quit) Typing QU exits this display with the raw material
            production set at the values displayed in the TOTAL row.

      Added to the domestic raw materials production is foreign raw material
      production.  Foreign raw materials are obtained through economic
      agreements negotiated in the U.S. Minor Negotiation Phase.  After the
      allocation of industrial capacity points to the raw materials production,
      the U.S. may have inadequate resources to maintain it's military units.
      If this occurs, you are notified that units have been forced to
      demobilize to conserve resources.  You may also voluntarily demobilize
      military units.  To do so simply type "Y" to the prompt DOES THE U.S.
      WISH TO DEMOBILIZE ANY UNITS. Then type the number of units you wish to
      demobilize, not to exceed the total number of military units available.

    Secondary Goods Production -  The next economic decision concerns
      allocation of industrial capacity to the production of secondary goods:
      military maintenance, military mobilization, political action, and
      further industrial capacity.  In addition to the raw materials produced
      earlier, you must also budget money and the remaining industrial
      capacity in the production of these secondary goods.  A table will
      appear displaying the current economic situation.

        The column headings are:
        Food, Metal, Energy - What was produced from raw materials.

        IND (Industrial Capacity Points) - What was made available after
          allocating the points to the production of raw materials.

        $$$ (Dollars) - What is available in the current year's budget.  This
          represents the taxes against the GNP, which is based on the size of
          the U.S. economy.

        Current Year's PRD - The current year's secondary goods allocation.

        LIM PRD - The minimum necessary to maintain the current level of
          military maintenance.

        LST YR - The previous yea's production levels.

        The row headings are:
        AVAIL - The total number of units available for each category.

        MIL MT - Military Maintenance.  The raw materials, industrial capacity
         points, and money listed under those columns are the amounts required
         to maintain the units at their current level which is listed in the
         LIM PRD column.  Anything above the minimum level will increase the
         effectiveness of military units in negotiations with minor countries.
         The maximum number of maintenance points which can be produced is
         twice the number of mobilized units.

        MIL MB - Mobilization Points.  The number of new military units the
         U.S. is planning to build this turn.

        POL AC - Political Action Points.  These are used in the Political
         Action Phase to increase the probability of military, political,
         and/or economic agreements, which can result in a stronger U.S.
         situation in the next game turn.

        IND CP - Industrial Points.  These represent economic growth.  The
         quantity will be added to the U.S. domestic industrial capacity on
         the next game turn.

        NET - The amount of raw materials, industry capacity points, and
         dollars remaining after secondary goods production.  Not all
         surpluses will be lost for future production; 1/3 of Food and MEtal
         will be carried over to the next year, Energy and Industrial Capacity
         will be lost entirely, and all excess dollars are returned to the
         U.S. Treasury.

    When the prompt "ENTER PROD (P)/RE or QU" appears, choose from the options
      below.

        1.  PROD (P) - (Produce) Type P to adjust quantities of secondary
            goods to be produced.  A prompt will appear allowing you to adjust
            the quantities of secondary goods to be produced  for the current
            year (listed in the current year's production column): MIL MAIT
            (Military Maintenance), MOB (Military Mobilization), PAPS
            (Political Action Points), IND (Industrial Points).  Type in four
            numbers, separated by commas, representing the desired levels.
            Example: 12,2,3,4  This represents 12 points allocated for
            Military Maintenance, 2 points allocated to Military Mobilization,
            etc.
        2.  RE - (Refresh) Type RE to update the current display to reflect
            any changes made.
        3.  QU - (Quit) Typing QU exits this display with the secondary goods
            production set at values displayed in the current year's
            production column.

      The computer opponent calculates changes in the Soviet economy based on
      the three Politburo members currently in power.  If Soviet changes in
      leadership occur, bulletins describing the changes will be displayed at
      the end of Raw Material Production phase.  You will be informed of the
      Soviets' economic strategy only through observation of its results, such
      as sudden mobilization of military units, or dramatic growth in its GNP.

MILITARY PLACEMENT PHASE
------------------------
  In this phase the U.S. and the Soviet Union take turns placing Task Forces
  in any of the Minor Countries.  The objective of Task Forces is to influence
  the Minor Countries so that for whatever reason, either intimidation or
  political similarities, they decide to ally with the U.S.  A map is
  displayed representing the current military situation.  One Task Force
  equals three military units, or a fraction thereof.  For instance, if you
  have four military units, you be outfitted with two Task Forces.  The number
  of military units available initially is dependent on the scenario being
  played. Additional U.S. units may be raised by increasing the number of
  military mobilization points in the Economic Decision Phase, with a maximum
  of 15 military units possible.

  Task Forces may be placed in Ocean Areas only.  There is no limit to the
  number of forces which may be placed in an ocean area, and they may co-exist
  in an area occupied by Soviet Task Forces.  Remember that the placement of
  Task Forces is meant to influence minor countries and lead-into negotiations
  for military, political and economic agreements.  If a particular country
  has something you need, either in terms of raw materials, prestige, or
  military positioning, you may want to occupy an ocean nearby.  However, the
  position of you military units may be seen as a "threat" ad result in a
  limited war being waged during the U.S. Minor Negotiation Phase.

  The Soviets place their military units before you place your units.  When
  the prompt "ENTER TASK FORCE LOCATION (1-13)" appears, type in the number of
  the Ocean Area you would like to occupy.

POLITICAL ACTION PHASE
----------------------
  During this phase, the U.S. and the Soviet Union try to gain the right to
  negotiate with various minor powers.  This is done by allocating your
  Political Action Points (PAPs), earned in the Economic Decision Phase, among
  the 16 minor countries on the map.  No more than two points may be added to
  each minor country.

  When the prompt "PAPs: n ENTER <AC> FOR PLACEMENT or QU" appears, type in
  the "Area Code" (AC) of the minor country in which you would like to place
  your Political Action Points.  The country you have chosen will be marked
  with an X.  The prompt "ENTER PAPS (1 or 2)" then appears, asking you to
  enter the number of points you would like to allocate to that country.
  Continue allocating Political Action Points until you have depleted your
  supply of points.  Please note that you are not given the chance to change
  your entry, and if you enter more that the allowable number of points per
  country, you will lose those points.

  After you have allocated the U.S. Political Action Points, the Soviet s
  place their points.  If the U.S. has allocated more points for a country
  than the Soviet Union, the U.S. wins the opportunity to to establish
  agreements in the U.S. Minor Negotiation Phase.  If at the end of the
  Political Action Phase, either major power has remaining points in a minor
  country, there is a chance that the country may become slightly more
  favorable to the major power. This, together with the influence gained from
  deploying military units, determines how successful you will be in
  negotiations with minor countries.

U.S. MINOR NEGOTIATION PHASE
----------------------------
  In this phase you attempt to obtain economic, political, military and
  neutrality agreements with minor countries selected in the Political Action
  Phase.  A screen will appear in this phase showing which agreements are
  currently in force and with which major power, and which agreements are open
  for negotiation with a particular minor country. Economic and neutrality
  agreements are restricted to the political orientation of that country.
  Also displayed are the prestige points which will be gained or lost with the
  success or failure of negotiations.  A general description of the minor
  country's policies, the type of agreement desired by the minor country, and
  it's military strength.

  When the prompt "ENTER US RESPONCE: appears, select from the items listed
  under the U.S. Diplomatic MEnu.  Your options vary from cordial requests to
  military threats.  Your response should take into consideration the minor
  country's political alliance, existing relations with that country, and the
  military strength of the country.  The harsher your response the more liekly
  you will lose prestige points, even if you gain an agreement.  If you resort
  to Military Threat, you ae in effect declaring a limited war.

  The Minor Country's response will determine whether an agreement has been
  reached, or if a limited war has erupted.  This struggle is strictly between
  the U.S. and the Minor Country; the Soviet Union has not been involved.  The
  outcome of the limited war is determined immediately, calculated from the
  relative strengths and weaknesses of the two sides.  If you're the winner,
  you may gain economic, political and possible military agreements.  IF you
  lose, your prestige points are dramatically cut and the attacked country may
  become extremely hostile, thereby increasing the global tension level.
  After you have finished negotiating with each of the minor countries, the
  Soviets have their turn in making agreements.

WINNING GEOPOL
--------------
  The U.S. is victorious in GEOPOL by meeting it's GNP, prestige and national
  security goals, set at the beginning of the game, while at the same time
  avoiding war with the Soviet Union,  To increase GNP, a player must invest
  additional industrial output or gain economic agreements.  To gain prestige
  points, a player must successfully negotiate agreements with the Minor
  Countries without resorting to limited warfare.  To gain national security
  points, a player must achieve military agreements with minor countries
  and/or build an army larger than that of the Soviet Union.

  The Goal Status screen, displayed between turns, shows the relative U.S. and
  Soviet progress in attaining their respective goals.  Although the exact
  Soviet goals are unknown, a warning symbol (*W*) appears on the right side
  of the screen whenever the Soviets reach 90% or more of its goal in a
  particular category.

  If war breaks out before the GEOPOL portion of the game is complete, the
  GEOWAR victory conditions apply.

-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                  GEOWAR
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
GEOWAR simulates a world-wide conventional (non-nuclear) military struggle
between the United States and the Soviet Union resulting from the build-up in
world tension incurred in GEOPOL.  GEOWAR begins after either the Soviet Union
or the U.S. has declared war during the GEOPOL Strategic Decision Phase.

A map is displayed illustrating the various alliances the Minor Countries have
with either the Soviet Union or the U.S.  There is a built-in bias factor
against the major power which declared war.  Minor Countries which are
conquered by a major power afford that major power the use of their economic
resources.  The economic status of the U.S. and the Soviet Union are displayed
before the game begins.

ECONOMIC PLANNING PHASE
-----------------------
  Only one type of economic resource is available in GEOWAR, and only
  secondary goods production is under player control. Resource points are
  gained from domestic industrial strength (3 points per industrial capacity
  point attained in GEOPOL), plus foreign resources of occupied minor countries.

  When the prompt "ENTER PROD(P) or QU" appears, select from the following
  options:

    1.  PROD (P) - When the prompt "ENTER QTY FOR REINF/MOB/IND" appears,
        select the amount to be allocated among the three secondary goods.
        Enter three numbers, separated by commas representing the desired
        production of secondary goods.  Example: 8,12,4  This represents 8
        points towards Military Reinforcements, 12 points towards Military
        Mobilization, and 4 points towards Industrial Capacity.  The types of
        secondary goods available to you include:

          Military Reinforcements (REINF) - Each reinforcement point adds two
          land-naval strength points and one air strength point to a
          successful reinforced military unit.

          Military Mobilization Points (MOB) - Basically the same as the
          GEOPOL phase; the pints produce military units.  Each mobilized
          military unit costs four resource points to be maintained.  If there
          are inadequate resource points to maintain military units, you will
          be forced to demobilize any excess units.

          Industrial Capacity Points (IND) - Each industrial capacity points
          adds one unit of industrial capacity.  Each such unit produces three
          resource points.

    2. QU - Quit from this phase of the game with the current settings.

MILITARY REINFORCEMENT PHASE
----------------------------
  During this phase the U.S. and Soviets designate reinforcements to be sent
  to military units.   When the prompt "ENTER UNIT NO./RPT/RE or QU" appears
  select from the following options:

    1.  UNIT NO - Type the number of the military unit to be reinforced.  When
        the prompt" ENTER REINF PTS FOR UNIT X" appears, type the umber of
        reinforcement points you would like to allocate. Reinforcements are
        noted by an X in the area to which they were sent.

    2.  RPT - Type RPT to view the following reports while in GEOWAR;
        US/Soviet Military Presence - Displays the U.S. and Soviet forces by
        the following symbols: A = Army, F = Fleet.

          US/Soviet Area Ownership - Displays U.S. and Soviet control by the
          number of victory points in the area; positive numbers indicate U.S.
          control, negative numbers indicate Soviet control.

          U.S. Unit Status - Displays current military status.  Types of units
          are A = Army, F = Fleet. LOC indicates the unit's current position
          on the map. MVD indicates whether the unit has completed it's
          maneuvers. Strength is noted by two number, the first is Troop/Naval
          strength, and the second number is the Air strength.

          Air Situation - The results are given in positive numbers for the
          U.S. nd negative numbers for the Soviets.

    3.  RE - This causes the display to be updated with the current settings.

    4.  QU - Quit from this phase of the game with current settings.

MILITARY MOVEMENT PHASE
-----------------------
  In this phase you will have to decide which forces you would like to move
  and where you would like to place them.  When the prompt "ENTER UNIT
  NO./RPT/RE or QU" appears, select from the following options:

    1.  UNIT NO - Enter the number of the unit you would like to move.  When
        the prompt "UNIT IS IN (current location) MOVE TO <AC>" appears, enter
        the "Area Code" of the location to which you would like to move the
        unit.  If the move is successful, you will be notified with the prompt
        "UNIT MOVES TO (new location)."  Note that ocean areas should be
        entered as follows; OAn, where n is the number of the ocean area.

    2.  RPT - Enables you to view reports listed above.

    3.  RE - This causes the display to be updated with the current settings.

    4.  QU - Quit from this phase of the game with the current settings.

  Movement is subject to these restrictions:

    1.  A unit may only move once per turn and may only move to an adjacent
        area or remain in the same area.  Once exception is that an army may
        "transfer" an unlimited number of times from one ocean to an adjacent
        one.
    2.  U.S. fleets cannot enter land areas; however newly mobilized units do
        begin in their homeland.

    3.  U.S. armies on land can enter an ocean area only if there is an
        available friendly fleet to board in that area.  Each fleet can carry
        up to one army in this manner, and is known as an amphibious unit.
        Until the army debarks from the fleet, the two units move as one.

    4.  U.S. armies can debark from fleets onto land area which must be either
        the U.S. or a minor country having a military agreement with the U.S.

    5.  No more than three U.S. units may occupy an land or ocean area.  An
        amphibious unit counts as two units.

    6.  U.S. armies may enter only minor countries with which they have
        military agreements.

    7.  Newly constructed Soviet units may move.  Newly constructed U.S.
        units may not move since they are not mobilized yet.

MILITARY MOBILIZATION PHASE
---------------------------
  The player is informed of the number of units raised.  When the prompt
  "ENTER UNIT TYPE (A or F)" appears, enter the type of unit to be mobilized,
  either A for Army or F for Fleet.  A map displaying the military presence of
  armies and fleets appears after mobilizing the final unit.  Newly mobilized
  units appear on the homeland location.

AIR SUPERIORITY PHASE
---------------------
  To initiate air combat, respond to the prompt "ENTER <AC> FOR AIR OPS UNIT X
  or QU" by typing in the "Area Code of the location to which you would like
  to deploy air units.  The computer will then decide which unit can carry out
  air operations and informs you of their locations. The criteria for carrying
  out air operations are:

    1.  Armies at sea may not carry out air operations.

    2.  Fleets in port (in a land Area Code location) may not carry out air
        operations.

    3.  Military units with zero air strength points may not carry out air
        operations.

  An X will appear in the land or ocean area to which air forces have been
  mobilized.  After both the U.S. and Soviet Union have allocated all
  available air strength, the computer resolves air superiority in each land
  and ocean area in which aircraft were allocated.  The resulting air
  superiority levels is indicated as a positive number for the U.S. and a
  negative number for the Soviet Union in the range of 1 -3 .  The following
  restrictions apply to air combat:

    1.  Air superiority is a prerequisite to amphibious landings and attack on
        enemy forces in ocean areas.

    2.  Air superiority over an area may mean that reinforcements designated
        for enemy units in that area will not arrive.

    3.  The air superiority level affects combat odds.

ATTACK PHASE
------------
  During the Attack Phase, the U.S. and Soviet Union alternately select
  land/ocean areas for attack.  Minor powers successfully attacked earn
  victory points for the major power.  Areas under attack contain an X to
  indicate an attack.  Messages concerning Soviet attacks appear during this
  phase.  When the prompt "ENTER <AC> FOR ATTACK" appears, type in the Area
  Code for the location you plan to attack.  Attacks are subject to these
  restrictions:

    1.  Only units with non-zero combat strength may attack.

    2.  Only units in the same or adjacent area may be attacked.

    3.  Areas already under enemy attack may not be attacked.

    4.  Friendly minor power and ocean areas in which there are no enemy units
        may not be attacked.

    5.  Areas already under attack may not attack.

    6.  Units under attack may not attack.

    7.  Attacks launched against land areas from ocean areas (amphibious
        landings) have special rules.  The attacker must have air superiority
        over the area attacked.  Other friendly fleets not carrying an army
        may join in the attack once it has been initiated by the amphibious
        force, as may other amphibious forces.

    8.  Armies which form part of an amphibious force may only attack via
        amphibious landing.

    9.  Fleets in their home country may not attack.

    10. Attacks by fleets against enemy fleets at sea can only be carried out
        if the attacker has air superiority over the target area.

    11. Armies adjacent to an enemy already under amphibious attack may also
        attack that area.  The entire attack is still considered an amphibious
        attack for odds calculation purposes.

BATTLE PHASE
------------
  After all attacks are declared, each attack is resolved and reported in this
  phase.  Combat odds are calculated by the computer.  The total strengths of
  the attacker and the defender are totaled.  Minor country military strength
  is added to that of the defending military units.  Defense strength bonuses
  of 30 strength points and 15 points are added to the defense strength totals
  for attacks on the Soviet Union and the U.S. respectively.

  The raw strength point totals are modified as follows:

    1.  Amphibious attacks - Defender strength multiplied by 1.5

    2.  Terrain -
           Clear Terrain - Defender strength multiplied by 0.8.
           Desert/Steppe Terrain - Defender strength multiplied by 1.0
           Rough Terrain - Defender strength multiplied by 1.2
           Urban Terrain - Defender strength multiplied by 1.4

    3.  Air Superiority - The side which has air superiority gains this
        advantage.
           Air Superiority Level 1 - Strength multiplied by 1.4
           Air Superiority Level 2 - Strength multiplied by 2.0
           Air Superiority Level 3 - Strength multiplied by 3.0

  Combat odd are calculated by dividing the defender's adjusted combat
  strength into the attacker's.  The computer resolves the combat and
  indicates whether the attack was successful or not.  Successful attacks
  cause ownership of land areas to change:

    1.  Defending military units must retreat to and adjacent friendly land
        area not under attack or be transferred to their home country.  The
        computer controls this transfer.

    2.  The minor country becomes friendly to the attacker, with the major
        power gaining the economic resources and victory points of that
        country.

    3.  One attacking army may occupy the defeated minor country.  The
        computer controls this "advance after combat."

  There is no penalty for unsuccessful attacks except the casualties sustained
  by the attacking and defending units.  The game turn conclude with the
  arrival of reinforcements.  Success in reinforcing units depends on air
  superiority.

WINNING GEOWAR
--------------
GEOWAR is won by having 60 victory points for two consecutive turns.  If after
gaining 60 or more points the player falls below 60 on the next turn, the
player must then try to regain the 60-point advantage.

1983 Strategic Simulations
