                               OBJECTIVE KURSK

                              TABLE OF CONTENTS

 1.0 INTRODUCTION
        Description of Action - Talking to the Computer - Saving a Game - The Map -
        Starting the Game (Apple) - Starting the Game (Atari)
 2.0 GENERAL DESCRIPTION
        Parts Inventory - Abbreviations
 3.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY
        Determining Conditions of Play - Historical Set Up - Sequence of Play - Keeping Time -
        Game Duration
 4.0 GROUP ADJUSTMENT PHASE
        Combat Groups - Combat Units - Dividing Combat Groups - Transferring Units -
        The Map Display - Ending the Game - Renumbering Groups
 5.0 SUPPY PHASE
        Depot Movement - Supply Distribution - New Depots - Supply Usage
 6.0 TACTICAL PLOT - ROAD MOVEMENT PHASE
        Selecting Combat Groups - Mode Selection - Road Movement - Plotting Tactical Movement -
        Combat Situations - Plotting Bombardments - Plotting Recon Missions
 7.0 AIR MISSIONS
        Planning Airstrikes
 8.0 COMBAT RESULTS CALCULATIONS
        Weapons Systems - Disruption - Disruption Effects - Terrain Effects - Zones of Control -
        Attack Strength Allocation - Morale Reduction
 9.0 TACTICAL EXECUTION & COMBAT PHASE
        Airstrike Resolution - Bombardment & Recon Resolution - Tactical Movement -
        Minefield Attacks - Opportunity Fire - Assault Combat - Retreats -
        Advance After Combat - Combat Reports
10.0 WEATHER
        Rain - Rain Effects
11.0 VICTORY DETERMINATION
        Scoring - Victory Levels
12.0 SOLITAIRE PLAY
13.0 ORDER OF BATTLE
14.0 STANDARD DIVISION CONTENT

1.0 INTRODUCTION
      In the Battle of Kursk the German Army committed their best armored formations in an attempt
      to encircle and destroy the powerful Soviet forces located in the Kursk salient. The German
      plan called for the Ninth Army to attack from the north and the Fourth Panzer Army to attack
      from the south of the salient. OBJECTIVE KURSK is a grand tactical level game covering the
      Fourth Panzer Army attacks against the Soviet forces on the southern flank of the Kursk
      salient.
1.1 Description of Action
      Each game turn consists of 12 hours of operations. Operations consist of supplying and
      moving combat forces, changing formations, planning assaults, air strikes and Artillery
      bombardments and resolving combat situations.
1.2 Talking to the Computer
      To enter a response to the computer that consists of numbers (such as the number of bombers
      in an airstrike) type the number into the computer and press the <RETURN> key. To select a
      routine from a menu or answer a Yes/No question just press the desired key.

      WHERE THE EXIT COMMAND IS NOT SPECIFIED, PRESS <RETURN> TO QUIT THE ROUTINE.

1.3 Saving a Game
      At the end of each player's ORDERS PHASE and at the end of each turn the computer will
      allow the player(s) to save the game in progress. You will need a scratch disk to store
      the saved game data. Save game disks for the Apple must be initialized for SSI use during
      a game by following instructions included in the game program. Atari users may use any
      disk that has been properly formatted for use on the Atari. Once a game is saved you will
      be able to restart it at the point where you left off.

      WHEN RESTARTING A SAVED GAME YOU MUST SET THE CORRECT SOLITAIRE LEVEL AND NUMBER OF
      PLAYERS ON THE OPENING MENU.

1.4 The Map
     The game map covers the battlefields on the southern flank of the Kursk salient, from
     kursk in the north to Belgorod in the south. Movement around the map is controlled by
     a hexagon grid system (31 X 32 hexes) with each hexagon representing 3 miles.

1.5 Starting the Game (Apple)
     To begin the game, boot your game disk and the game will begin automatically. If you
     are using an Apple II with Pascal you must first use your BASICS disk. If you are
     using an Apple III you must first go into Apple II emulation mode.

1.6 Starting the Game (Atari)
     To begin the game, boot the Scenario side of your disk. After selecting the starting
     values for your game, you will be told to insert the Game side of your disk. Remove
     all cartridges from your computer before booting your disk.

2.0 GENERAL DESCRIPTION

2.1 Parts Inventory
     a. Game box
     b. Rule book
     c. 5-1/4" game disk
     d. Two map/data cards

2.2 Abbreviations
     Abbreviations used in the game are listed below:

     DIV  division                   BDE  brigade                     RGT   regiment
     BN   battalion                  GDS  guards                      MECH  mechanized
     MOT  motorized                  PZG  panzergrenadier             INF   infantry
     ART  artillery                  AT   anti-tank                   ARM   armor
     SPA  self-propelled artillery   AC   armored car                 H     howitzer
     FH   field howitzer             M    mortar                      RL    rocket launcher
     ENGR engineer

     Combat formations with names instead of numbers are abbreviated as follows:

     LAH  Leibstandarte Adolf Hitler          DR   Das Reich
     TOT  Totenkopf                           WIK  wiking
     GD   Grossdeuchland                      VOR  Voronegh

3.0 SEQUENCE OF PLAY
     OBJECTIVE KURSK is a two-sided game: German vs. Soviet. The German forces must be commanded
     by a human player. The Soviet forces may be commanded by either a human or the computer.

3.1 Determining Conditions of Play

     At the start of the game the player(s) must determine the conditions under which the game
     will be played.
     On the APPLE version the conditions may be changed by entering the following:

     (1) NEW GAME or SAVED GAME
     (2) 1 DISK DRIVE or 2 DISK DRIVES
     (3) SOLITAIRE or TWO PLAYERS
     (4) SOLITAIRE LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY

     On the ATARI version

     (1) NEW GAME or SAVED GAME
     (2) SOLITAIRE or TWO PLAYERS
     (3) SOLITAIRE LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY

3.2 Historical Set-Up
     At the start of the game the computer will assign all combat forces to their starting
     locations prior to the battle.

3.3 Sequence of Play

      1. Soviet Group Adjustment Phase
      2. Soviet Supply Phase
      3. Soviet Tactical Plot & Road Movement Phase
      4. Soviet Air Mission Allocation Phase
      5. Soviet Save Game Phase
      6. German Group Adjustment Phase
      7. German Supply Phase
      8. German Tactical Plot & Road Movement Phase
      9. German Air Mission Allocation Phase
     10. German Save Game Phase
     11. Tactical Execution & Combat Phase
     12. Save Game Phase

3.4 Keeping Time
     Each game turn represents 12 hours, AM turns are daylight turns and PM turns are night
     turns. The calender day is adjusted at the start of each AM turn.

3.5 Game Duration
     The German player may end the game at any time. The game will end automatically at the end of
     7/15/43 PM turn.

4.0 GROUP ADJUSTMENT PHASE
     During the group adjustment phase the player(s) may divide their combat groups, transfer
     units from one group to another, view the map display or end the game.

4.1 Combat Groups
     Combat groups may contain from 1 to 5 brigades, regiments or battalions (units). Each
     Combat Group (CG) has an identification number and a divisional designation. It is possible
     for more than one CG to have the same divisional designation. Different CG's will never
     have the same group identification number(ID).
     Group ID numbers 1-63 are reserved for German CG's. Group ID numbers 64-127 are reserved
     for Soviet CG's.

     EXAMPLE: LAH SS PZG GROUP 3

     The example shows the CG's divisional designation and group ID number as it would appear
     on your display. LAH SS PZG is the divisional designation and "3" is the group ID number.
     CG's with the designations PANZER, PZG, TANK or MECH are considered to be "mechanized"
     groups. All other CGs are considered to be "infantry" groups. Mechanized groups will be
     represented by an oval symbol when displayed on the map. Infantry groups will be represented
     by an "X" symbol when displayed on the map. Mechanized groups have a greater rate of
     movement than infantry groups.

4.2 Combat Units
     Each CG may contain from 1 to 5 combat units (CU). CU's are given a descriptive name to
     reflect their basic function. Each CU may contain up to 6 different weapon systems.
     Weapon systems may be either infantry, artillery or AFV

     EXAMPLE: TANK BDE
               65 T-34      12 INF

     In the example a CU is shown as it would appear on your display. TANK BDE is the descriptive
     name. The CU contains 2 different weapon systems: 65 T-34 type tanks and 12 infantry squads
     (120 men).

     EXAMPLE: ARM INF RGT
              122 INF  16  50AT      4   75AT
                8 75H   2 105M      12   81M

     In this example ARM INF RGT is the descriptive name. The CU contains 122 infantry squads,
     16 50mm anti-tank guns, 4 75mm howitzers, 2 105mm howitzers and 12 81mm mortars.

4.3 Dividing Combat Groups
     Enter the group ID number of the CG you wish to divide. The computer will automatically
     select the lowest numbered "empty" group to receive the divided units. The computer will
     then list the units in the dividing CG. Enter the unit number (0-4) for each unit you
     wish to transfer to the new CG. When you have completed your transfers just press <Q>
     to quit the routine. The newly formed CG will have the same divisional designation,
     morale rating and supply level as the dividing CG.

4.4 Transferring Units
     Units may be transferred between two CGs that occupy the same hexagon on the map.
     Both the "gaining" and "losing" CGs must have the same divisional designation.
     Enter the group ID number of the losing CG. The computer will automatically select
     the other CG in the hex as the gaining CG. The procedure for transferring units is
     the same as described in 4.3. A CG may never contain more than 5 units. If the morale
     rating of the gaining CG is greater than the morale rating of the losing CG, then the
     morale rating of the gaining CG will be reduced to the level of the losing CG.

4.5 The Map Disply
     The map used in OBJECTIVE KURSK employs a hexagon grid 32 hexes high by 31 hexes wide.
     Only a fraction of the map (7 hexes high by 13 hexes wide) may be viewed at one time.
     By pressing the keys 1-6 the cursor can be moved around the map (1-N,2-NE,3-SE,4-S,
     5-SW,6-NW). If the cursor is moved to the edge of the display then the map display
     will scroll to reveal the hidden portions of the map. German combat group symbols
     contain the letters "GE". Soviet combat group symbols contain the letters "SU".

4.6 Ending the Game
     The German player may elect to end the game at any time. The computer will display
     the final score.

4.7 Renumbering Groups
     The players may renumber groups using the (R)ENUMBER GROUP routine. Only groups
     that are currently on the map may be renumbered.

5.0 SUPPLY PHASE
     Supply points are used each time a CG moves or performs a combat function. During
     the supply phase the player(s) move their depots to the front line areas to
     replenish the supplies of their CGs.

5.1 Depot Movement
     German depots always start their movement on a road hex on the south edge of the map.
     Soviet depots always start their movement on a road hex on the east edge of the map.
     Depots always start their move with a "supply level" of 15. A depot's supply level
     represents the maximum number of supply points it may distribute to EACH friendly CG.
     Depots may be moved in the various directions by pressing keys 1-6 (1-N,2-NE,3-SE,4-S,
     5-SW,6-NW). For each hex a depot moves its supply level will be decreased. The supply
     level reduction varies with the type of terrain entered and the weather as shown below:

                        CLEAR                  RAIN
          road          1(1/4)                 4(1)
          clear           1                     4
          town          1(1/4)                 4(1)
          woods           1                     4
          gully           1                     16

     The numbers shown in the parentheses indicate the supply level reduction for movement
     along a road(from one road/town hex to another road/town hex). A depot may never move
     adjacent to an enemy CG. German depots may never cross a river hexside during a rain
     turn unless it is moving along a road.

5.2 Supply Distribution
     At any time during a depot's move the depot may distribute supplies by pressing the
     (S)UPPLY key. All friendly CGs within 2 hexes of the depot may receive supplies.
     CGs may only receive supplies once per supply phase. CGs that receive supplies will
     disappear from the map for the remainder of the supply phase. The number of supply
     points received by a CG will be equal to the supply level of the depot. The maximum
     number of supply points that a CG may "carry" at one time will vary with the CGs MODE
     (see 6.2).

5.3 New Depots
     The player(s) may request new depots at any time during the supply phase by pressing
     (N)EW DEPOT key. The new depot will begin on the same side of the map, but on a different
     road hex. German depots may enter on two different roads on the south edge of the map.
     Soviet depots may enter on five different roads on the east edge of the map. the entry
     roads will be changed each time a new depot is requested. The player should continue
     pressing the (N) key until the depot begins in the desired area.

5.4 Supply Usage
     Combat groups use 1 supply point for each hex that they move. CGs use 1 supply point
     each time they employ (1) bombardment fire (2) opportunity fire (3) defensive fire
     (4) offensive fire. Unsupplied CGs may not move or perform any fire missions except
     defensive fire (at 50% normal effectiveness).

6.0 TACTICAL PLOT _ ROAD MOVEMENT PHASE
     During the tactical plot/road movement phase the player(s) may alter the mode of
     their CGs, perform road movement with their CGs in "road' mode, plot tactical
     movement for CGs in "assault" or "mobile" mode or plot bombardment fire for CGs in
     "static" mode.

6.1 Selecting Combat Groups
     Move the cursor over the CG to be moved/plotted and press the (G)ET UNIT key. The
     computer will display the CG's designation, group ID number and mode. If there are
     two CGs in the hex and you wish to go to other CG then press the (Q)UIT key to get
     the bottom CG in the Stack. When you have completed your movement/plots for a CG
     you may hit the (Q)UIT key and move the cursor to get another friendly CG. Instead
     of the (Q)uit key you may hit the (N)EXT GROUP key and the computer will automatically
     "get" the next highest group ID number.

6.2 Mode Selection
     A CG's mode will affect its ability to move and fight during the current turn. CGs
     in mobile or road mode may not use their towed artillery during the current turn.
     The movement rates and defense adjustments for each mode are shown below:

                     MECH MOVE        INF MOVE       DEFENSE
          static         0                0            x1.5
          assault        1                1            x1.0
          mobile         4                2            x0.75
          road          24                6            x0.62

     A CG's ability to carry supplies is affected by its mode as shown below:

                                  MAX SUPPLY LEVEL
                        static            36
                        assault           18
                        mobile            12
                        road              24

     You may alter the current mode of a CG by pressing the S,A,MorR keys. A CG may not
     be placed in road mode unless it currently occupies a road or town hex. German CGs
     may not be placed in road mode if they occupy a minefield hex. CGs may not be placed
     in road mode if they are adjacent to an enemy CG.

6.3 Road Movement
     Only CG's in the road mode may employ road movement. When using road movement a CG may
     only enter road or town hexes. CGs may never move adjacent to an enemy CG when using road
     movement German CGs may never use road movement into a minefield hex. A Cg may not be
     placed in road mode if they are currently adjacent to an enemy CG.

6.4 Plotting Tactical Movement
     All movement except road movement must be planned in advance (plotted) during the
     TACTICAL PLOT - ROAD MOVEMENT PHASE. CGs perform their planned moves during the
     TACTICAL EXECUTION & COMBAT PHASE. A tactical plot consists of from 1 to 4 numbers
     with each number representing an instruction to move in a particular direction during
     a particular TACTICAL EXECUTION segment. There are 4 movement segments during the
     TACTICAL EXECUTION & COMBAT PHASE. The first number in the tactical plot instructs
     the CG to move ia a particular direction during the first movement segment. The second
     number in the tactical plot refers to the second segment,etc. Listed below is a
     summary of the legal movement plots.
     1. move north
     2. move northeast
     3. move southeast
     4. move south
     5. move southwest
     6. move northwest
     0. do not move this segment

     EXAMPLE: plot 0321
     In the example tactical plot shown above the CG would not move during segment 1. would
     move southeast during segment 2. northeast during segment 3 and north during segment 4.
     Only CGs in assault or mobile mode may perform tactical movement. The number of hexes
     that may be moved using tactical movement is affected by the type of CG involved
     (mechanized or infantry) and the CG's mode. Tactical movement allowances are shown below:

                               MECHANIZED               INFANTRY
              assault               1                       1
              mobile                4                       2

      INFANTRY CGs MAY ONLY USE TACTICAL MOVEMENT DURING MOVEMENT SEGMENTS 1 & 2.

      Mechanized CGs in assauly mode may execute their 1 move during any of the four
      movement segments (a plot of 0003 would instruct the CG to save its move until the 4th
      movement segment). Infantry CGs in assault mode may execute their 1 move during either
      of the first 2 segments.

6.5 Combat Situations
     Combat situations will occur whenever a CG attempts to execute a tactical move into
     a hex occupied by an enemy CG. If more than one friendly CG attempts to enter a
     particular enemy occupied hex during the same movement segment then these friendly
     CGs will combine their combat strengths to attack the enemy CG(s) in the hex. An "S"
     command may be inserted at the end of a CG's tactical plot if you want the CG to
     attack in a particular direction but not to move or advance. The S should be the last
     figure in the tactical plot; any instructions that appear after the S will be ignored.
     The S command will only affect the last segment in which movement was plotted.

     EXAMPLE PLOT 111S

     In the example, the CG would move north during segments 1 & 2. During segment 3 the
     CG would attack if the hex to the north is enemy occupied but would not move or
     advance after combat. The maximum length of a tactical plot is four symbols. A
     "2322S" plot would be treated as "2322" by the computer.

6.6 Plotting Bombardments
     Only CGs in staticmode may perform bombardments. To perform bombardment a CG must
     contain FH (field howitzer) type weapons. Eligible CGs may bombard enemy CGs either
     1 or 2 hexes away. Bombardments are plotted the same as tactical movement. Bombardment
     plots must start with a "B" symbol. The 2nd(and 3rd) symbol indicate the direction the
     guns are firing.

     EXAMPLE PLOT B12

     In the example plot, the target hex is located 2 hexes away: one hex in direction 1 and
     one hex in direction 2.

     EXAMPLE PLOT B3

     In the example plot the target hex is located one hex away in direction 3.

6.7 Plotting Recon Missions
     CGs may perform recon missions to "observe" the contents of an adjacent hex. Recon plots
     must start with an "R" symbol. The second symbol indicates the direction (from the CG)
     to be searched.

     EXAMPLE PLOT: R4

     In the example plot, the CG will search the adjacent hex to the south. Recon missions
     are executed BEFORE the tactical movement segments.

7.0 AIR MISSIONS
     The player(s) may assign friendly bombers to attack enemy CGs. Friendly fighters may be
     assigned to escort friendly bombers or intercept enemy bomber missions.

7.1 Planning Airstrikes
     Each player may plan up tp 5 airstrikes each AM turn. During the air missions phase the
     computer will display the number of friendly fighters and bombers that are available
     that turn. The player may move the cursor to the desired target by pressing 1-6
     directional keys. Press the (7) SELECT TARGET key when the cursor is over the hex you wish
     to attack. The player must indicate how many bombers and how many fighter escorts will
     participate in the airstrike. Each aircraft point equals 4 actual aircraft. Soviet airstrikes
     may only be directed against a hex that is adjacent to a Soviet CG. After all airstrikes
     have been planned, any fighters that have not been assigned to the escort will automatically
     be used for C.A.P. (combat air patrol) over the battlefield. C.A.P. fighters will attempt
     to shoot down enemy bombers before they can attack your CGs.

8.0 COMBAT RESULTS CALCULATIONS
     There are 6 types of combat that occur in the game (1) airstrike (2) bombardment
     (3) opportunity fire (4) minefield (5) defensive fire (6) offensive fire. All forms
     of combat use the same general method for calculating casualties:
     attack strength/defense strength - casualties. The attack and defense strengths may
     be modified according to the type of combat, terrain, or CG mode. Also a random
     factor is added to all combat calculations.

8.1 Weapon Systems
     Listed below are the weapon systems used in the game including their attack strength (AS)
     defense strength (DS) and weapon type (AT):

                   AS         DS        WT                       AS           DS          WT
     AFV                                         Towed guns
     PZ-II          2          5        AP         170FH          4            1          HE
     PZ-III         5          6        AP         152FH          3            1          HE
     PZ-IV          7          6        AP         203FH          5            1          HE
     PZ-V           8          7        AP           81M          1            2          HE
     PZ-VI          9          9        AP           82M          1            2          HE
     SG-III         6          7        AP          120M          2            1          HE
     JPZ-IV         7          8        AP         132RL          4            1          HE
     T-34           7          7        AP         150RL          4            1          HE
     KV-1           7          8        AP
     SU-76          6          5        AP       Infantry
     SU-85          8          8        AP          INF           2            3          I
     SU-152         5          9        HE          ENGR          3            3          I
     AC             1          4        HE

     Towed guns    AS         DS        WT      All systems that have a DS greater than 3 are
     50AT           3          1        AP      considered to be AFV(armored fighting vehicle)
     75AT           5          1        AP      target types. Systems with a DS less than 4
     88AT           7          1        AP      are considered to be SOFT target type. AP type
     45AT           2          1        AP      weapons are designed to destroy AFV targets
     76AT           5          1        AP      while HE and I type weapons are designed to
     75H            1          1        HE      destroy SOFT targets. AP weapons are assumed
     105H           2          1        HE      to have an AS of 1 when attacking SOFT targets.
     150H           3          1        HE      HE and I are assumed to have an AS of 1 when
     122H           2          1        HE      attacking AFV targets. AFV type weapons are
     152H           3          1        HE      assumed to have an AS of 6 when using OFFENSIVE
     105FH          2          1        HE      FIRE against SOFT targets(the SU-152 has an AS
     150FH          3          1        HE      of 10).

     I type weapons have their AS enhanced when using DEFENSIVE FIRE against AFVs. If the
     attacking AFVs outnumber the attacking INF squads(the degree of enhancement varies
     with the attacking AFV to INF ratio).

     CGs in mobile or road mode may never fire their towed gun type weapons.

     During airstrike combat, each German bomber point has an AS of 3 against AFV targets
     and an AS of 1 against SOFT targets. Soviet bombers are HALF as effective as German bombers.

     During minefield attacks all targets are considered to have a DS of 4. The minefield
     attacks with a stength of 80.

     During OPPORTUNITY FIRE, HE and AP type weapons may fire using 1/2 of their normal AS.
     I type weapons may not perform opportunity fire.

     During OFFENSIVE FIRE towed gun weapons fire using 1/2 their normal AS.

     During BOMBARDMENT FIRE only FH type weapons may fire using 1/2 their normal AS.

8.2 Disruption
     In addition to taking casualties, a CG will suffer "disruption" when attacked. When
     attacking SOFT targets the disruption will be equal to the ATTACK STRENGTH/TOTAL TARGETS.
     When attacking AFV targets the disruption will be equal to the AFV's DESTROYED/TOTAL TARGETS.

     CGs that are attacked more than once in a turn will accumulate disruption points(up to 99).
     At the start of each turn all CGs will have their disruption points returned to ZERO.

     Assaulting CGs that force the defender to retreat will have their disruption level reduced
     by their morale rating(if the morale rating is 80 then the disruption level is reduced
     by 80%.

     Assaulting CGs that fail to force the defender to retreat will have their disruption
     reduced by one half their morale rating.

8.3 Disruption Effects
     Following OFFENSIVE FIRE, if a defending CG's accumulated disruption level is greater than
     its morale rating and the disruption suffered by the attacker during the combat was less
     than or equal to 89, then the defending CG will be forced to retreat. If a CG's disruption
     level is greater than its morale rating then it will be unable to move any further that turn.

8.4 Terrain Effects
     CG's defending in a WOODS or TOWN hex will have their defense strength DOUBLED. Soviet CGs
     defending in a MINEFIELD hex will have their defense strength DOUBLED. CGs located in a
     GULLY hex, attacking into a non-GULLY hex will have their attacking strength HALVED.
     CGs located in a non-GULLY hex attacking into a GULLY hex will have their attack strength
     DOUBLED.

8.5 Zones of Control
     Every CG has a zone of control (ZOC) that consists of the hex that it occupies and the
     six adjacent hexes. Friendly depots or CGs in road mode may never enter an enemy ZOC.
     If a CG moves directly from one enemy ZOC into another enemy ZOC then that CG may be
     attacked by enemy OPPORTUNITY FIRE (see 9.5). CGs may not retreat into an enemy ZOC
     unless the retreat hex is currently occupied by a friendly CG in either static or
     assault mode.

8.6 Attack Strength Allocation
     In most combat situations the CG being attacked will consist of several different weapon
     systems. In calculating combat results the total attack strength is divided to attack
     each weapon system separately. The percentage of the total attack strength to attack
     each weapon system is equal to NUMBER IN WEAPON SYSTEM/TOTAL TARGETS

     EXAMPLE: DEFENDING CG CONTAINS
              50 INF    25 45AT    25 76AT

     The total number of targets equals 100, 50% of the attack strength would attack the INF,
     25% would attack each type of anti tank gun.

8.7 Morale Reduction
     CGs have their morale rating reduced by 1 point each time they perform an assault or
     are attacked. CGs with morale less than 50 will gain 1 morale point at the start of
     each turn.

9.0 TACTICAL EXECUTION & COMBAT PHASE
     During the tactical execution & combat phase (TEC phase) movement and combat functions
     are performed in the following sequence:

     1. airstrike resolution
     2. bombardment & recon resolution
     3. Segment 1
        a. German movement
        b. German attack resolution
        c. Soviet movement
        d. Soviet attack resolution
     4. segment 2
     5. segment 3
     6. segment 4

9.1 Airstrike Resolution
     Airstrike resolution consists of (1) air to air combat and (2) bomber attacks. Air to
     air combat consists of CAP. vs. escort combat and CAP. vs. bomber combat. The number of
     CAP fighters to intercept each enemy airstrike is equal to 1/2 the total number of
     fighters flying CAP. The number of CAP fighters that must fight the escort is equal
     to the number of intercepting CAP fighters or the number of escorting fighters, Whichever
     is LESS. The number of CAP fighters that may engage the bombers is equal to the number
     of intercepting fighters minus the number of escorting fighters. listed below are the
     the air to air accuracy rating for aircraft:

                                    vs FIGHTER      vs BOMBER
            German Fighter              20%             40%
            Soviet Fighter              10%             40%
            Bomber                       1%             --

     Prior to bombing the target each bomber will have a 3% chance of being destroyed by FLAK.

     Bomber attacks will cause casualties and disruption in the target CG(s). Bombers will
     have their effectiveness enhanced if fewr than 50 CAP fighters intercepted the airstrike.
     The bomber effectiveness adjustments are shown below:

            CAP                 BOMBER EFFECTIVENESS
             40                         x1.2
             30                         x1.4
             20                         x1.6
             10                         x1.8
              0                         x2.0

9.2 Bombardment & Recon Resolution
     Only the field howitzer (FH) type weapons may fire bombardments. Bombardment attacks
     are resolved at 1/2 the FH weapon's normal attack strength. During PM turns, bombardment
     effectiveness will be HALVED. Bombardments cause casualties and disruption in the target
     CG(s). For each recon mission the computer will display the appropriate number of AFVs,
     ARTILLERY and INFANTRY in the searched hex.

9.3 Tactical Movement
     CGs will execute tactical movement in accordance with their tactical plots. Tactical
     movement may initiate MINEFIELD ATTACKS, OPPORTUNITY FIRE or ASSAULT COMBAT. CGs that
     have a disruption level greater than their morale rating will be unable to execute their
     remaining tactical plots. A CG may not move into a hex that is currently occupied by
     two friendly CGs (its remaining tactical plot will be aborted).

9.4 Minefield Attacks
     Minefield attacks are initiated whenever a German CG attempts tp LEAVE a minefield hex.
     Prior to the minefield attack the CG will have a chance to destroy the minefield. The
     chance to destroy the minefield is equal to (50 + ENGR squads)/180. If the minefield
     is destroyed then it will not attack the CG. Minefields have an attack strength of
     80 against both AFV and SOFT targets. Minefield attacks cause both casualties and
     disruption in the moving CG. Minefield attacks will occur against CGs that execute
     a move plot of "0" in a minefield.

9.5 Opportunity Fire
     If a CG moves directly from one enemy ZOC into another enemy ZOC, then the CG may be
     targeted for OPPORTUNITY FIRE. Enemy CGs that are adjacent to the hex in which the
     moving CG started AND adjacent to the hex that the moving CG enters may fire if they
     are in STATIC mode. Only AFV and TOWED GUN weapon systems will perform opportunity fire.
     Opportunity fire is resolved at 1/2 of the normal attack strength. During PM turns,
     opportunity fire attack strengths will be HALVED.

9.6 Assault Combat
     Assault combat is initiated whenever a CG attempts to enter a hex occupied by an enemy
     CG. Assault combat is resolved at the end of the movement segment. All CGs that attempt
     to enter the same enemy hex will combine their attack strengths. Assault combat consists
     of (1) defensive fire (2) offensive fire (offensive and defensive fire are considered
     to occur simultaneously). The CG(s) in the "enemy" hex combine their attack strengths to
     perform defensive fire. During offensive fire towed gun weapons have their attack strengths
     halved (CGs in mobile mode may not fire their towed guns).

9.7 Retreats
     Following assault combat defending CGs will be forced to retreat if their accumulated
     disruption level is greater than their morale rating and the disruption suffered by the
     attacker during the combat was less than or equal to 80. CGs may not retreat into an
     enemy ZOC unless that hex is currently occupied by a friendly CG in either static or
     assault mode. CGs may not retreat into a hex that is currently occupied by TWO friendly
     CGs. If the defending CG(s) are unable to retreat, then they will be destroyed instead.
     CGs that retreat have their supply level reduced to zero and are placed in mobile mode.

9.8 Advance After Combat
     Following assault combat, if the defender was forced to retreat then the attacking CG(s)
     may advance into the vacated hex. CGs may not advance if their disruption level is
     greater than their morale rating. A maximum of TWO of the attacking CGs may advance after
     assault comba. CGs that FAIL to advance after assault combat will have the remainder
     of their tactical plot canceled. CGs that advance after combat will have their disruption
     level reduced according to their morale rating (if the morale rating is 80 then the
     disruption level is reduced by 80%). Assaulting CGs that fail to force the defender to
     retreat will have their disruption level reduced by 1/2 of their morale rating.

9.9 Combat Reports
     As each type of attack is being resolved the computer will display the DISRUPTION points
     added to the defending and attacking forces.

10.0 WEATHER
      The weather may be either CLEAR or RAIN. The weather is subject to change at the start
      of each turn.

10.1 Rain
      There is a 10% chance that it will rain each game turn. Rain hinders CG movement and
      supply operations.

10.2 Rain Effects
      On rain turns, streams turn into rivers and gullys turn into swamps. CGs must use their
      engineers to bridge the rivers and clear paths through the "swamps". CGs attempting to
      cross a river or exit a gully hex during a rain turn will suffer disruption. The greater
      the number of engineers in the group, the smaller the amount of disruption incurred.
      A maximum disruption level of 90 will be suffered for each hex moved. Rain has no effect
      on road movement. Rain QUADRUPLES the movement penalty for supply depots.


11.0 VICTORY DETERMINATION
      At the end of the game the computer calculates the score. Victory is determined based
      upon point differntials.

11.1 Scoring
      Victory Points (VPs) are awarded for the control of towns and for surviving combat
      forces. A town is controlled by the player who last had a CG or supply depot move
      onto the town (i.e., a town need not be garrisoned in order for it to be under a
      player's control). Listed below are the VPs awarded for control of each town on the map:

      Lgov            10000                Oboyan            10000
      Kursk           25000                Shehlgry          10000
      Belgorod        25000                Prokhorovka        5000
      Sudzha           5000                Korocha            5000

      Points awarded for each surviving WEAPON are equal to the weapon's AS plus its DS

      EXAMPLE: PZ-VI - 18 VPs (9 + 9)    88AT - 8 VPs (7 + 1)

11.2 Victory Levels
      To determine the victory level subtract the total German VPs from the total Soviet VPs
      and compare the result to the following table:

       20000 or  less                       German Decisive
       20001 to  40000                      German Substantive
       40001 to  60000                      German Marginal
       60001 to  80000                      Draw
       80001 to 100000                      Soviet Marginal
      100001 to 120000                      Soviet Substantive
      120000 or  more                       Soviet Decisive

12.0 SOLITAIRE PLAY
      When playing solitaire games the computer will command the Soviet forces. There are 4
      levels of solitaire difficulty. The level of difficulty is determined when starting a
      new game and may be altered when restarting a saved game. As the level number is
      DECREASED the Soviet minefields will become more effective and Soviet reinforcements
      will arrive sooner (reinforcements will arrive 2 turns EARLIER for each level
      DECREASED and 2 turns LATER for each level INCREASED). These levels may be used to
      handicap a two-player game if desired. Level 3 is considered "historical" level.
      It is possible to start a game in solitaire mode save it and restart it as a two-
      player game. To do this set the main menu to two-player mode before reloading the
      saved game data. It is possible to save a two-player game and restart it as a solitaire
      game. This should only be done expermentally as the computer may be confused by many
      human devised deployments.

13.0 ORDER OF BATTLE

      GERMAN                                               Soviet Reinforcements
      52 Korps: 57,255,332 infantry                        69 Army:107,111,183,270,305 Rifle(turn7)(D)
      48 PZ Korps: 3, 11 Panzer: GD PZG:167 Infantry       Voronezh Front Reserve(turn 6)
      Group Raus: 106,320 Infantry                         2 GDs Tank(D) 4 GDs Tank(B) 5 GDs Tank(C)
      2 SS PZ Korps: LAH,DR, TOT SS PZG                    5 GDs Tank Army (turn6)
      3 PZ Korps: 6,7,19 Panzer:168 Infantry               5 GDs Mech(B) 18 Tank(A) 29 Tank(C)

      Reinforcements
      WIK SS PZG (turn 8)(E)
      23 Panzer (turn 10)(E)
      16 PZG (turn 12)(E)

      SOVIET
      40 Army:141,142,142,144,145,146,309 Rifle:
      40 Army Artillery
      6 GDs Army: 66,67,68,69,70,71,89 GDs Rifle
      6 GDs Army Artillery
      7 GDs Army: 72,73,74,75,76,77 Gds Rifle:213 Rifle
      7 GDs Army Artillery
      1 Tank Army: 3 Mech: 3,6 Tank
      Voronezh Front:105,106,108 GDs Rifle
      Voronezh Front Artillery


14.0 STANDARD DIVISION CONTENTS

     GERMAN*              MORALE        AFV         GUNS        INF

     PZG                    90          246          222        382
     SS PZG                 90          220          222        370
     PZ                     80          172          174        306
     INF                    70           0           222        438

     SOVIET               MORALE        AFV         GUNS        INF

     GDS MECH               90          261          278        566
     GDS TANK               85          250          166        302
     MECH                   80          240          278        554
     TANK                   75          250          166        302
     GDS RIFLE              75           0           192        514
     RIFLE**                65           0           156        460
     ARTILLERY              50           0           356         0

     * Some German divisions are understrength (especially those entering the game
       as reinforcements).

     ** Most Russian rifle divisions are understrength(in many cases by as much as 50%).


CREDITS

  Game Design and Programming: Gary Grigsby
  Game developement: Joel Billings
  Historical Research: Michael Musser
  Customized Disk Operating System: Roland Gustafason
  Art & Graphic Design: Louis Hsu Saekow, William Carman and Kathryn Lee
  Typesetting: Abra Type
  Printing: A&a Printers and Lithographers
