WALKTHROUGH

Lands of Lord British

You start the game just east of Castle Britain and the City of Britain.
Go into the City, and buy a Mace and some Chain Mail. This'll give you a
good start with fighting the monsters of the land. Leave and enter the
Castle and speak with Lord British. Offer to do him some service and he
will tell you to search for the Grave of the Lost Soul. A good strategy
is to keep your food level above 100 at all times throughout the game.
You'll need a vehicle that can travel over water to reach site, so this
means you need to earn some funds. The best way to gain funds, and
hitpoints in the process, is to go fight in dungeons. You can also buy
hitpoints from Kings by offering them Pence. All dungeons have different
maps, but each level has the same type of monsters. With this in mind
make your way Northwest to the Castle of the Lost King and speak with
him. He will send you on a quest to kill a Gelatinous Cube. These can be
found on the third floor of any dungeon. Your goal here should be able
to make it down to the third level of a dungeon and back out again
without using magic "Ladder" spells. This will ensure you're building
your character to a decent level before moving on. You'll also need this
money to buy some transportation. Save your money and buy an Aircar.
This can travel on land and water, but not through forests or over
mountains. It is the most versatile vehicle in the game, though. Return
to the Lost King and he will give you your reward: The Red Gem. By the
end of this quest you should have the Aircar, a Great Sword, and some
Plate Mail. As soon as you can afford it, buy the Reflect Suit. Wait on
getting a better weapon. Something better is available for free
eventually. Travel to the Southeast towards the Lands of Danger and
Despair. Just Northwest of it is an island with what looks like a sign
post. This is the Grave of the Lost Soul. Enter it and return to Lord
British for your reward: some points of strength.


Lands of the Feudal Lords

Travel East to the Lands of the Feudal Lords, and search out Castle
Barataria. He will give you a quest to search out the Southern Sign
Post. Travel Southwest to the Lands of the Dark Unknown. The Southern
Sign Post is along its West Coast. Travel back to Barataria and get the
King's Strength Bonus. Now is another good time to do a special kind of
level building. You may have noticed that at the places the Kings send
you give you Status Point points. There's a nice trick you can do with
these. When you enter one, then enter another, that other one resets
itself, and you can re-enter it and gain more stats. You can do this all
the way up to 99. See the General Info section for info on which place
gives you which stats. None of these give Strength. You can only get
Strength by completing the Kings' quests over and over again until you
hit 99. One of these places is different, though. The Pillars of the
Argonauts in the Feudal Lords' Lands will give you weapons. Each time
you re-enter it (after visiting another place first of course), you will
get a new weapon, each more powerful than the last, all the way up to
the Blaster. You can then sell the weaker weapons for some more cash.
Now head to Castle Rondorin and he will send you on a quest to kill a
Carrion Creeper. These can be found on the 5th or 6th level of any
Dungeon. First off, search around the towns for some Ladder Up and
Ladder Down spells. Buy at least 6 of each. Head out to a dungeon and
use the spells to go down, kill a Creeper, and come right back up. Go
back to the King and he will give you your reward: The Green Gem.


The Lands of the Dark Unknown

Travel Southwest to the Lands of the Dark Unknown and find the Castle of
Olympus. The King here will send you on a quest to find the Pillar of
Ozymandias. This is found on the Southwest corner of the Lands of the
Feudal Lords on an island. Return and get your Strength bonus, then head
to the Black Dragon's Castle just to the southwest. He will have you go
and kill a lich. These can be found on the 7th or 8th level of any
dungeon. Do the same thing again with the Ladder Up and Ladder Down
spells. Return to the King and he will give you your reward of the Blue
Gem and also some valuable information. A princess will help a Space Ace
travel through time! Remember this information for later.


Lands of Danger and Despair

For your final quests before heading into Outer Space, travel to the
Lands of Danger and Despair. Find the Castle of the White Dragon and the
King here will send you on a quest to find the Tower of Knowledge. This
can be found on the Northeast corner of the Lands of Lord British on a
island. Return and get your strength bonus. Travel a short distance to
the NE and enter Shamino's Castle. He will send you on your final
monster killing quest. This time you must travel to the bottom of a
Dungeon (level 9 or 10) and kill a balron. Use the ladder strategy yet
again, and return for your final reward: The White Gem.


Outer Space

Go to the town of Nassau just south of Castle of Olympus and buy a
shuttle. IMPORTANT: Make sure you have at least 3000 gold to refuel your
shuttle! The more gold the better, as you don't know how long it will
take you to complete your adventure in space. Refuels cost 500 gold.
Board the shuttle, and a countdown will begin. Fly very carefully and
dock with the station near you. The shuttles fit in the docks like a
key. Missing the dock will cause you to crash and damage your shields.
Personally, I use the small ship. It has better shields, but lower max
Fuel. The large one is opposite. Once you've docked, just hit the arrow
key in the direction of the ship you want, and fly away from it. To
refuel, just dock and pick your ship again the same way. Overhead view:
Up = Thrust, Down = Breaks/Reverse, Left/Right = Rotate. In first person
view, the arrows move the target around the screen. To change views hit
"V". To get a map of Space hit "I". On this map, H's are places where
enemies are, pluses are docking stations, diamonds are stars, and the
colored dots are empty space. The last two are useless. Remember that
Earth is in the exact center of the map. You will return here once
you've become a Space Ace. To become a Space Ace, face your ship in the
direction of the area you want to go in Overhead view, and switch to
first-person view. Hit "H" to jump to Hyperspace and travel to the new
area. If there are enemies here, you will immediately go into battle.
The enemies are very easy to keep on the screen. Whichever side of your
cursor they are on, they will move in the opposite direction. Just keep
them moving in circles until they get closer to you. Aim slightly high,
and you will get direct hits. Kill 20 enemies and you'll become a Space
Ace. You don't have to keep track of how many you've killed. If your
fuel level drops to around 900 or 800, it's a good idea to find a refuel
station. If you run out of fuel, you'll be stranded in space. Once you
kill the 20th one, a screen will come up telling you of your
accomplishment. Head back to Earth's area. IMPORTANT: Only your original
shuttle can re-enter Earth's atmosphere! Either of the other two will
burn up and you'll die! Enter the shuttle, and fly straight at the
Earth.


End Game

You must now rescue a princess in order to travel back through time and
stop Mondain before he became all powerful. Princesses can be found in
any Castle. You may have heard the jester yelling "I have the Key!" This
is the key to the princess's cell. Kill the jester and you will get a
key. The Guards will come after you, but if you've been level building
like I've suggested, they should be no problem for you. Try and unlock
the princess's cell. If the key doesn't work, exit the castle and repeat
the same thing again until you free her. Get her outside, and she will
tell you that a time machine can be found to the northwest. It may be
quite a ways to the northwest, but it will be there. It will look like a
Blue and Yellow Sphere with a door. Make sure you have a ton of
hitpoints before coming here, and have all your stats maxed. At least
5000, but the more the better. All four of the gems you got are required
to activate the time machine. Red Gem Green Gem Blue Gem White Gem Board
the time machine and you will be taken back in time to Mondain's
Fortress. Go up to him and start attacking. He'll eventually turn into a
bat. Chase him to the west, and he will stay against the west wall. Be
careful of the fire spouts. They do A LOT of damage! Keep pounding
Mondain until he collapses. Make your way over to the Gem of
Immortality. If he gets back up again, go back and pound him some more
until he collapses. Keep trying to get back to the Gem. Mondain must be
unconscious before you try and get it. Keep going back and forth until
you get next to it. Once you do, "Get" the Gem and you've won!




GENERAL INFORMATION

Interesting Encounters Grave of the Lost Soul - Stamina Southern Sign
Post - Charisma Pillar of Ozymandias - Wisdom Tower of Knowledge -
Intelligence Pillars of Protection - Agility Eastern Sign Post - No
Bonus The Sign Post - Stamina Pillars of the Argonauts - Weapons A good
way to get experience and get gold is to rescue Princesses. There is one
in every castle, 8 in all. You must kill the Jester, fight the guards,
and use the key you get to unlock the Princess's cell. If the key
doesn't work, exit the castle, and try again. IMPORTANT: If you decide
to do this before you do your 3rd monster killing quest, you MUST leave
one Princess to rescue for after this or you will never be able to
finish the game! Name of the bard in some of the towns sound familiar?
;) For those of you who have played the later Ultima games, one of the
continent's shapes may look familiar to you. No, it's not Lands of Lord
British. That actually looks nothing like Britannia. It's the Lands of
Danger and Despair. It's the same shape as Serpent Isle from Ultima VII
Part Two. Some of the locations have familiar names, too. They are all
in one of the Ultimas somewhere, some more than one, although their
names may have changed. If you've played the games, you should know what
they've changed to. If you can't remember, go back and search for them.
I won't tell you, but trust me, they're there somewhere! :) If I've
missed one, please let me know: Britain, Yew, Linda, Doom, Perinia,
Paws, Montor, Fawn, Moon, White Dragon's Castle, Gorlab, Spinebreaker,
and the Grave of the Lost Soul.


SPELLS

Blink - Physically teleport a short distance in dungeons. Create -
Creates a magical wall in front of the Caster. Destroy - Removes a
magical wall in front of the spell caster. Kill - A powerful spell which
completely destroys your enemy. Ladder Down - Creates a magical ladder
that will let you travel one level down in a dungeon. The ladder
dissipates after one use. Ladder Up - Creates a magical ladder that will
let you travel one level up in a dungeon. The ladder dissipates after
one use. Magic Missile - Throws a ball of magical force at your enemy.
The more skilled the magic user, the more powerful the spell. Open -
Opens a coffin and negates any traps that may be on them. Prayer - This
is a cleric spell by which you can call on the aid of your deity to help
you. You start with it and have unlimited casts. It can only be used in
dungeons and produces random effects to aid you. Unlock - Allows someone
to open a chest and negates any traps.


TRANSPORTATION		Cost			Steps
before		Range	Damage	Terrain consuming food

Foot				-				2								
	Grass/Woods Horse				20-38
			3									Grass/Woods
Cart				80-152
			3									Grass/Woods
Raft				180-342
		4									Water
Frigate				320-608
		5					3		32-70	Water
Aircar				560-950
		6					3		32-80	Grass/Water
Shuttle				720-1368
		-									Space Time
Machine		-				-
									Time

