		      -- Wasteland QuickStart --
			 -- Blackstar 259 --

GETTING STARTED

Insert the boot disk, turn on your computer, and the game will
automatically load.  You will then see the title screen with two
options at the bottom: Start and Utils (Utilities).  If you're new to
Wasteland, press U to call up the Utilities Menu; otherwise, if you've
played before, you can select S to start the game.

To cancel any action that you've started, press <ESC>.  This applies
throughout Wateland.

USING TWO OR MORE DISK DRIVES

When you're prompted to insert a disk, press 2 to use drive 2.
Anytime you're prompted to insert a particular disk side during the
course of play, you can type 1 or 2 to access that specific drive.
Should you wish to schange the designated slot for you drive
controller, press <CONTROL>-S and a slot number (from 1 to 7).

UTILITIES MENU

To use any option, press the first letter:

Copy	This is the first thing you must do.  If you don't make copies
	and play on the original disks, then the original disks will
	forever be altered.  Select for a one- or two-drive system.
	You'll then see 1 2 3 4 Exit at the bottom of the screen.  You
	need to make a copy of all four sides, so you must select eash
	number once.  Follow the onscreen instructions to complete the
	copying process.  Press E to Exit when you're done.  After you
	copy your disks, you can start the games.  Do not put
	write-protect tabs on the copies you made.

Restart Automatically Restarts your party near the Ranger Center.  Use
	this command if you party is hopelessly stuck somewhere, or if
	you want to start the game over with the same characters.
	To Restart, save the game where you are.  Then insert your
	boot disk, reboot, and select U for the Utils option.  Select
	C to Copy, and copy all new disk sides on a separate set of
	disks.  Select R for Restart and insert the old side 1 when
	you see the prompt "Please put side 1 in drive 1."  Then
	insert the new copy of side 1 when you see "Please put
	destination Wasteland character disk in drive 1."  Now you're
	ready to start over with your old characters --minus all the
	items and cash they were carrying.

Print	Prints all of your characters' statistics.

Start	Starts the game.  You're asked "Use last saved game (Y/N)?"
	Choose Y if you want to start where you last saved the game
	with the Save command.  Choose N and you'll start where the
	computer last saved the game (which happens anytime you answer
	"yes" to "Enter new location?").  With either choice, you'll
	be prompted to insert on or more disk sides.  If you're new to
	the game, you'll start in the Ranger Center.

TIME AND DISTANCE

The maps in Wasteland vary in scale.  The large desert map contains
the various city maps, which, in turn, contain building maps or whole
underground levels of sewers and hideouts.  In combat, distances may
seem a bit off for the map you're on, but these are tactical distances
and are valid in combat only.

Because of the differences in scale of the maps, time passes
differently on them.  Though a single keystroke on the computer will
move you one space north in both the desert and in a building, the
amount of time that each move takes is different.  The game takes this
into account for healing and deterioration purposes.  Remember that
time passes for characters in the main party as well as for any
disbanded characters who are not moving.  If you disband a character
and send him off to find a doctor to help a wounded comrade, the
seriously-wounded character will still bleed away.

SELECTING OPTIONS

Whenever you need to select an option, just press the first letter in
that command (The one exception is unEquip; in this case press E.)

Whenever you're selecting from a menu that appears along the bottom of
the screen, you have two choices: 1) press the first letter of the
command, or 2) use the left or right arrow keys to highlight the
command, and press <RETURN>.

Whenever you need to select an item, skill or attribute from a list,
simply enter its number.  To scroll through a list, you have three
options: use the up and down arrows, right and left arrows, or I and K
keys.  An item or skill number with a "_" next to it (i.e., "6_"),
marks the end of the list.

MOVEMENT COMMANDS

Use the following commands to move your party around:

I		Move up
J		Move left
K		Move down
L		Move right
Spacebar	Toggles view of party roster on and off

RANGER CENTER

When you're in the Ranger Center, you see the following options at the
bottom of the screen:

Create		Creates a character.
Delete		Deletes a character.
Start		Starts you outside of the Ranger Center.

NON-COMBAT COMMANDS

At any time, except during combat, you can use the following commands
by pressing the first letter of the option:

Use		Use a skill, item, or attribute.
Enc		Encounter --call up combat commands.
Order		Estalish a new party Order.
Disband		Disband --break up the party into two or more groups.
		This command is also used to permanently dismiss a
		Non-Player Character from your party.
View		Switch the View between two or more groups.
Save		Saves the game.  Refer above for an explanation of saved
		games in Wasteland.
Radio		Radio in to Ranger Center to see if a party member has
		earned a promotion.
<SHIFT>-#	Call up the Use command for a specific character.
<CONTROL>-S	Use the first skill listed for the character in the
		first party slot.
<CONTROL>-R	Reorder a character's skills or possessions.  You must
		first select a character from the roster and view
		either the skill or possession menu before using this
		command.

COMBAT COMMANDS

When you engage in battle, you can choose from the following options
by selecting the first letter of the commmand:

Run		Move party or individual character one space.
Use		Use a skill, item, or attribute.
Hire		Hire a Non-Player Character to join your party.
Evade		Evade an attack.
Attack		Attack an enemy.
Weapon		Change Weapons.
Load/unjam	Unjam and/or Load a weapon.
<CONTROL>-A	Show list of encounter groups to attack.  Will only
		work with player characters, not hired NPC's provided
		your foes are within range of your weapons.

To speed up the combat message scrolling rate, press the up arrow or
<CONTROL>-K.  To slow it down, press the down arrow or <CONTROL>-J.

VIEWING CHARACTERS

Enter a nubmer from 1 to 7 to view that character's statistics.  Here
are some options that you can use while in this mode:

From the first screen
Pool		Pool cash.  Pools all the party's loot and gives it to
		the character you're viewing.
Div cash	Divide cash.  Divides the cash evenly among the
		characters.

From the second (Item) screen
Enter any item number for the following choices: (When prompted Y/N,
the Y will be highlighted.  Press <RETURN> to accept this option).
Reload		Reload weapon. (Only shows if you choose an ammo clip
		that's appropriate for your currently-equipped weapon.)
Unjam		Unjam weapon.  (Only shows if you use a jammed weapon.)
Drop		Drop an item.
Trade		Trade an item.
unEquip		Equip or unequip an item.
<CONTROL>-R	Reorder items.

From the third (Skill) screen
<CONTROL>-R	Reorder skills.