       ***B-1 Nuclear Bomber***


LOADING INSTRUCTIONS:

Make sure that basic in place when you load this game. Just turn on the 
computer after this and it will load itself. Then follow the prompts.

INTRODUCTION:

B-1 is a computer simulation of a manned bomber nuclear strike mission 
into Soviet Russia. The player gives commands into the computer which 
'flies' the bomber on the mission. The bomber must fly to within bomb 
range of its target to deliver its weapon. It is opposed by nuclear 
MIG's and SAM's of the USSR's air defense system. It defends itself with 
ECM, evasive action and nuclear tipped multi-purpose Phoenix missiles. 
It is advised that you obtain a map of the Soviet Union to help you for 
directional assistance in course setting.

PROGRAM STARTUP:

The program starts by printing an initial display containing the primary 
target of the mission, the five letter Fail Safe Code which is required 
to arm the bomb, and a list of alternate targets and Soviet defense 
complexes. The program then enters the main loop in which it requests 
and processes the pilot's command and then runs the Soviet Air Defense 
Command, launching MIG's and SAM's.

BOMBING THE TARGET:

The B-1 bomber in the game carries one Short Range Attack Missile(SRAM) 
with a one Megaton warhead. This is large enough to completely destroy 
the target. The SRAM has a range of 250 kilometers(km).

The primary target is chosen at random from the list of targets. All 
targets have a population of more than one million persons.

The Fail Safe Code is a group  of five random letters. Its purpose is to 
prevent inadvertent arming of the SRAM. A note of the code should be 
made prior to giving the first command. It will be used later to arm the 
SRAM.

THE SOVIET AIR DEFENSE COMMAND:

The air defenses of the Soviet Union consist for the purposes of this 
game of about twenty Defense Complexes(DC's). Each DC evaluates the 
range to the B-1 and decides whether to launch every time interval. 
Launching depends on the range (750km max), altitude (lower less likely) 
and the state of the SRAM. a B-1 without SRAM is less likely to be 
attacked; one with an armed SRAM draws a great deal of attention. A 
launch will cause a message to be displayed on the screen giving  type 
of unit launched (either a MIG or SAM) and intercept time, as well as 
the name of the launching DC. Unless prevented in some way each unit 
will intercept, resulting in a nuclear airburst which can cause 
destruction if the bomber. It can also cause changes in course and speed 
and loss of fuel.

SAM's and MIG's may be defended against by the use of Electronic Counter 
Measures (ECM), evasive action or Phoenix missiles. Phoenix missiles may 
also be used to eliminate DC's from a range of up to 200 km.

ECM causes MIG's and SAM's to lose their target. Repeated use lowers it 
effectiveness. ECM is better against SAM's and is not range dependent.

Evasive action is a violent alteration in course and altitude, which 
works better against SAM's than MIG's. It works only on close units. It 
poses the risk of flying into the ground when starting at low altitude.

Phoenix missiles are nuclear tipped homing missiles. They may be fired 
at units within 10 seconds of intercept. They work better against MIG's. 
they may be fired against DC's in range.

Each type of defense is selected by giving the computer the appropriate 
command.

COMMANDS:

Commands may be divided into four types: flight control, navigational, 
combat and bombing. Each command and each target and Defense Complex is 
recognized by the computer from its first two letters e.g. EC for ECM, 
PH for Phoenix missile, MO for Moskva, KO for the Konosha Defense 
Complex.

After each command is entered there will be a short delay while the 
computer processes Soviet air defenses. For long autopilot times this 
delay will be longer.

FLIGHT CONTROL COMMANDS:

Flight control commands are Altitude: AL, course: CO and Autopilot: AU. 
Altitude requests an ordered altitude, which the B-1 wil then climb or 
dive to at its maximum rate. Although orders greater than 25,000m or 
less than 100m can be given the computer will not fly the B-1 outside 
these limits. Altitude affects the probability of a DC launching, lower 
being less likely. However, enough room should be left for evasive 
action or the effects of a nuclear airburst. In addition flying below 
300m runs the risk of a terrain avoidance radar failure, i.e., the B-1 
flying into the ground. Should evasive action or an airburst change the 
B-1's altitude it will stay at the new altitude until it receives new 
orders.

Course requests an ordered course to which the B-1 will turn at maximum 
rate. If altered by evasive action or airburst the B-1 will stay on the 
new course until further orders.

Autopilot will request a time for the autopilot to fly the B-1. for 
convenience this is arranged in seconds, minutes, hours. While the 
autopilot is in control the player may not interrupt it. Events which 
occur which generates messages, such as MIG or SAM launch or any target 
coming into range, will cause the autopilot to return control to the 
player. The exception to this is a report of a target going out of 
range, which will not interrupt the autopilot.

NAVIGATIONAL COMMANDS:

The navigational commands are Navigator: NA, Search: SE, Status: ST, and 
Radar: RA.

Navigator requests a city to fly to. It recognizes all targets and 
Defense Complexes from the first two letters of their names. It also 
recognizes TH for Thule AFB, to which the B-1 must return upon 
completion of its mission. It will produce a range and bearing to the 
desired city. Use of the navigator takes a large of game time. This is 
NOT the command to use with a MIG hot on your tail!!!

Search will return the range and bearing of the nearest active DC within 
+/- 45 degrees of the B-1's present course. This is intended as an aid 
to flak suppression. The search command also requires a large amount of 
game time.

Status returns a display of important aircraft parameters including fuel 
and a contact summary. Radar returns only the contact summary. A contact 
summary is also printed before each request for a command if any 
contacts are held.

COMBAT COMMANDS:

the combat commands are ECM: EC, Evasive Action: EV, and Phoenix 
Missiles: PH.

ECM,may cause airborne MIG's and SAM's to lose their targets or self 
destruct. The effect is not range dependent and works better on SAM's. 
With each use the effectiveness of ECM is reduced because the Soviets 
figure out what is happening.

Evasive action is a violent change in course and altitude to throw off 
pursuers. The size and direction of the change is random. The effect is 
very range dependent and works better on SAM's than MIG's. If evasive 
action results in a negative altitude the B-1 will crash.

Phoenix missiles are armed by the PH command and then launched against a 
close SAM or MIG or a DC within 200 km. A target is requested by the 
computer. If only ENTER is pressed ('N' for PET) the Phoenix is fired at 
the closest interceptor if it is in range. This is known from the 'MIG-
25 in Phoenix range.' message or time to intercept less than 10 sec. for 
any interceptor. The Phoenix is more effective against MIG's. If a DC's 
name is input and that DC is in range the Phoenix will destroy it for 
the balance of the game.

BOMBING COMMANDS:

The bombing commands are Arm: AR, and Bomb: BO.

Arming the SRAM is required prior to dropping it. To do this the Fail 
Safe Code must be input when requested. Arming the SRAM also results in 
excessive attention from the Soviet Air Defense Command, so it is wise 
not to do this too early. Once armed, the SRAM cannot be disarmed.

The Bomb command launches the SRAM. A final verification in Yes/No 
format is required. A No answer aborts the drop.

ENDING THE GAME:

The game is ended when the B-1 is destroyed or returns to base. To end 
the game after dropping the SRAM head for Thule AFB (TH). At a certain 
distance from Russia over the Artic the game is ended.

Note-Although the B-1 may not have enough fuel to reach Thule on its own 
it is presumed to refuel from a tanker aircraft over the Artic.

No matter how the game is ended a short mission summary is printed and a 
chance to play again is offered.

LISTS OF TARGETS:

Soviet Targets:
  Murmansk (MU)
  Arhangelsk (AR)
  Sverdlovsk (SV)
  Moskva (MO)
  Kiyev (KI)
  Volgograd (VO)
  Astrakhan (AS)
  Sevastopol (SE)
  Yerevan (YE)
  Leningrad (LE)

Soviet Defense Complex:
  Pechenga (PE)
  Ukhta (UK)
  Onega (ON)
  Konosha (KO)
  Syktyvkar (SY)
  Vyborg (VY)
  Tallinn (TA)
  Pskov (PS)
  Rostov (RO)
  Yaransk (YA)
  Podolsk (PO)
  Lipetsk (LI)
  Pinsk (PI)
  Kharkov (KH)
  Dubovka (
.............incomplete....

