The 1970s


At the dawn of the 1970s, computers were bulky, expensive, and mostly locked away in office buildings and universities. By the end of the decade you could buy one from the corner electronics store, small and light enough to carry out yourself—often for less than a thousand dollars—and about half a million customers would have preceded you. While mainframes had increasingly given way to minicomputers like the PDP-8, which were closer in cost and size to a car than a home, by the end of the 70s momentum had conclusively shifted to microcomputers like the Apple II, the TRS-80, or the Commodore PET. The personal computer revolution had arrived, and it would exponentially accelerate in the decade to come.

An irony of the transition to micros was that it forced game design ambition to take a serious step backward. The earliest home systems had crushingly small storage and memory footprints compared to their mainframe ancestors. Take the IBM System/370 mainframe line launched in 1970, for instance: a typical model offered up to 512 kilobytes of memory and ran at around ten million cycles per second. The first-generation TRS-80 that launched in 1977, while orders of magnitude cheaper, was far slower, and had only 4K of memory to store a running program and all its data. Mainframe games like Adventure were thus vastly more capable and expansive than the home computer games that followed them. The mainframe text game Acheton [Jon Thackray et al. 1978] grew to over four hundred rooms, and the original PDP-10 Zork eventually used up a full megabyte of data—comparable to the amount of text in four hundred pages of this book. Contemporary PC games like Pirate Adventure, by contrast, had to fit in the equivalent of a single page spread. It would take microcomputer text games quite a while to improve on the ambitions of their mainframe predecessors. 

While digital text games had existed in various forms before the 70s, it wasn’t until then that they came into their own as a medium with trends, traditions, and tropes. Many of that medium’s most recognizable forms were born in the 70s. The release of Dungeons & Dragons in 1974 spawned at least three digital game genres as early hackers tried various ways of digitizing the immersive tabletop game with its numerical systems for simulating fantasy adventures: roguelikes and computer roleplaying games, which trended more toward graphics and action, and prose-based text adventures focused on puzzles and immersion. All would become foundational and remain active in one form or another for at least the next fifty years. Experiments with hypertext in the 60s and 70s were mostly centered around nonlinear information retrieval, not interactive fiction, but they laid technical and conceptual groundwork for storytellers in later decades to explore. And gamebooks, after many earlier experiments, would break into the mainstream with the massively popular Choose Your Own Adventure book series; easy to implement on a computer, the digital gamebook would be a popular low-tech way of telling an interactive story in years to come.

While the 70s brought many hardware innovations, perhaps the most significant advance for text games was in software with the widespread adoption of the programming language BASIC. Invented at Dartmouth in 1964, BASIC displaced earlier teaching languages like FOCAL or Fortran over the next decade, its simplicity and clarity of syntax inviting younger and less technical computer users to build their own programs instead of just using those written by others. At a time when computers were still often distrusted by the general public—seen as tools of big government and big business—the notion that anyone could (or everyone should) learn to code was radical, even revolutionary. The first issue of the People’s Computer Center newsletter in 1972 included a cartoon (reprinted in this book’s coverage of 1973) showing protesters of all ages and skin tones demanding to be part of the computer revolution. One holds a sign reading, “No more Fortran! BASIC is the people’s language!” BASIC let nearly anyone write code and make games, foreshadowing future tools that would open the doors to digital storytelling even wider, and it remained a popular game-creation tool through the 1980s.

Communities of computer users numbered in the single digits before the 70s, but that changed as magazines, newsletters, computer shows, and local user groups created national and international networks of coders and game makers. Creative Computing magazine, founded in 1974, shared BASIC program listings users could type into their minis or micros, along with interesting projects from their members that brought computers into the domains of art, education, and music; the first West Coast Computer Faire in 1977 brought ten thousand enthusiasts together in San Francisco. Years before the idea that software could be copyrighted was legally entrenched, “folk games” like ROCKET 1972, Star Trek 1974 and Hunt the Wumpus 1973 often passed from author to author, each one improving, tweaking, and sharing their code and text. Early enthusiasts spent the decade exploring the possibilities of computer games, not yet yoked to the constraints a commercial game industry would bring in the years to come.

Computer technology in the 1970s was often transitional, with existing analog infrastructure bootstrapping the emerging digital world. The punch cards of the earliest computers had evolved into punch tape, inch-wide paper reels that encoded bits as tiny round holes. Punch tape was easy and cheap to duplicate, write to, or read from, with support built in to many models of teletype. Some of the earliest computer game sales were for mail-order rolls of punch tape holding BASIC code at the rate of about three lines per foot. Later in the decade, audio cassettes became a common interface to home computers: users could often grab off-the-shelf tape players and blank cassettes to store data as screeching audio and play it back into their machines. Many early PCs likewise used stock television sets as monitors, replacing the printouts earlier systems had relied on in the absence of cheap CRTs (or the video RAM required to drive them). Tellingly, the most common way to mass distribute a program in the 1970s was still to print its source code in a magazine or book. By the 80s, software was distributed on disks.

While even the original Oregon Trail was played via connection to a distant computer, that link was to a single mainframe over a phone line, offering no way to interact with other connected users. That would change through the 1970s with the emergence of the ARPANET, ancestor of the modern internet. Bringing pairs, dozens, or even hundreds of far-flung players together into the same virtual space would enable radically new kinds of games in the decades to come, a development foreshadowed by dnd. But even in the 70s, the ARPANET’s collapsing of distance was profoundly influential. Adventure only grew into its addictive final form through an indirect collaboration between authors on opposite coasts, while Zork evolved in response to a growing community of fans watching its development in real time and offering feedback and suggestions.

It’s not too far a stretch to claim that text games could only emerge because of the communities the internet would enable. Each early computer was a pocket of isolation; ideas and innovations were hard to spread. But like any art form, text games required conversation to develop. As networks of fans emerged, they could begin to explore and define what computer games in general, and interactive prose in particular, might become.


More Text Games from the 1970s

Given the difficulties of dating early computer programs and the multiyear periods of development and evolution many went through, some dates listed, especially early in the decade, are only approximate. 

1970
KING (James A. Storer, BASIC); also known as Pollution Game. Early land and resource management sim inspired by Doug Dyment’s King of Sumeria, itself a recreation of The Sumerian Game 1964. Nuclear Destruction (Rick Loomis, play-by-mail). The first computer-moderated play-by-mail game. 

1971
Baseball (Don Daglow, PDP-10). Strategic all-text baseball simulator that describes play on the field in dynamic English sentences, like a commentator. Hammurabi (David H. Ahl, BASIC). Influential port of King of Sumeria to BASIC.

1972
ANIMAL (Nathan Teichholtz, BASIC). Guessing game the player could extend with new questions and answers. Empire (Peter Langston, HP 2000). Early 4X wargame with dozens of commands; later extended by Ben Norton and others; original version believed lost. PARRY (Kenneth Colby, Lisp). Chatbot by a psychiatrist that tried to emulate a paranoid schizophrenic. Trek73 (William Char et al., HP 2000). Distinct from the Mike Mayfield Trek lineage 1974; featured an all-text interface and dialogue from TV show characters.

1973
Caves1 (Dave Kaufman, PDP-8). Cave exploration program that may have influenced Hunt the Wumpus 1973. Ecala (Don Daglow, PDP-10). Improved ELIZA chatbot. FURS (Dan Bachor, BASIC). Simulates a French fur trading expedition with strategies around buying/selling and supplies. Lemonade Stand (Bob Jamison, MECC). Simple business game later popularized in various Apple ports.  

1974
Star Trader (Dave Kaufman, HP 2000F). Space trading game influential on Trade Wars 1991. Wander (Peter Langston, BASIC). Early program for making text exploration games with rooms and portable objects; Castle, written for this system, may predate Adventure 1976 but original version is believed lost.

1975
The Dungeon (Rusty Rutherford, PLATO); aka pedit5. D&D adaptation that inspired dnd 1975. Dungeon (Don Daglow, PDP-10). D&D adaptation where multiple players at one keyboard could control members of an adventuring party. DUNGEON (John Daleske et al., PLATO). D&D adaptation with first-person view. The Great Guano Gap (Bill Roper et al., PLATO). One of the earliest known hypertext fictions for a public network; simulated navigating the PLATO account of a fictional character who’d become trapped in the machine. 

1976
Buffalo Castle (Rick Loomis, Flying Buffalo). Choice-based gamebook that introduced readers to the Tunnels & Trolls roleplaying game. Dukedom (Vince Talbot, PL/1). More extensive descendant of Hammurabi involving land purchases, taxes, wars, and plagues. Moria (Kevet Duncombe and Jim Battin, PLATO). Inspired by earlier PLATO dungeon games; had dynamically generated dungeon levels, multiplayer with up to ten players, and a large persistent game world. Starweb (Rick Loomis, Flying Buffalo). Space-based play-by-mail game that remained popular for more than twenty years. Sugarcane Island (Edward Packard, WH Allen). First published version of the book series that would become Choose Your Own Adventure 1979. 

1977
Aldebaran III (Peter Langston, BASIC). Wander game based on Keith Laumer’s stories of space diplomat Jame Retief. Atom20 (Ray Brander, Apple II). Post-apocalyptic clone of The Oregon Trail 1971. Oubliette (Jim Schwaiger et al., PLATO). Another multi-player dungeon game; may have influenced Wizardry. Trek80 (Processor Technology, Sol 20). Trek clone with the twist that you could place an AM radio near your computer to get sound effects. 

1978
Acheton (Jon Thackray et al., IBM 360/165). Vast mainframe adventure written at Cambridge; lots of mazes. Adventureland (Scott Adams, Adventure International). One of the earliest text adventures written for a personal computer. Beneath Apple Manor (Don Worth, The Software Factory). Early roguelike dungeon crawler, one of the first games to use procedural generation. DECWAR (Bob Hysick et al., PDP-10). Multiplayer evolution of Super Star Trek 1974, later rebranded as MegaWars on CompuServe. Empyrean Challenge (Vern Holford, Superior Simulations). Sci-fi play-by-mail game with incredible complexity, supporting 150 players; turn results could be hundreds of pages long. Mystery Mansion (Bill Wolpert, HP-1000), aka Mansion. Murder mystery set in a monster-filled manor house. Scepter (Alan E. Klietz, CDC Cyber 6600) aka Scepter of Goth and Milieu. One of the earliest MUDs and the first to go commercial. Stuga (Kimmo Eriksson et al., PDP-10). Goofy Swedish text adventure, perhaps the earliest in a language other than English; authors were between ten and fourteen years old when they wrote it.

1979
Brand X (Peter Killworth and Jonathan Mestel, IBM 370) aka Philosopher’s Quest. Difficult parsed-based puzzle game. The Count (Scott Adams, Adventure International). Well-reviewed game from Adventure International set in Dracula’s castle. Dog Star Adventure (Lance Micklus, TRS-80). Star Wars inspired; one of the first parser games with type-in source code published in a magazine. Eamon (Donald Brown, Apple II). Text-based roleplaying game series and game creation tool that let players transfer their character between games. Empire of the Over-Mind (Gary Bedrosian, Apple II). Early text game to navigate via landmark rather than compass directions and use emergent solutions; came with a long narrative poem containing vital hints. Goblins (Hal Antonson and Linda Stix, Apple II). One of the earliest computer games with a credited female programmer. Haunt (John E. Laird, PDP-10). Haunted mansion game influential on several early designers. Local Call for Death (Robert Lafore, Adventure International). Conversational detective story from the Interactive Fiction label 1981. 

