Choose Your Own Adventure #1: The Cave of Time

1979

Edward Packard
Style: Choice-Based
Debuted: Jul 1979 (retail)
Launch Platform: Print
Publisher: Bantam Books
Launch Price: $1.25 (paperback)

Opening Text:

	You’ve hiked through Snake Canyon once before while visiting your Uncle Howard at Red Creek Ranch, but you never noticed any cave entrance. It looks as though a recent rock slide has uncovered it.

	Though the late afternoon sun is striking the opening of the cave, the interior remains in total darkness… 

In the early hours of a 1969 morning, on a long commuter rail trip from Connecticut to Manhattan, a lawyer edging up on forty is scribbling a complex diagram in a worn spiral notebook. The diagram looks “like a tree lying on its side with many branches and limbs.”7 He ignores the view out the window and his fellow passengers, other men in business suits, like him on their way to work. He is busy. He’s designing a book you can play like a game.

A few nights earlier, Edward Packard had been spinning a bedtime story for his children. With three hours of daily commuting, the only chance he had to see them during the week was at bedtime, when he liked to make up stories himself rather than read from a book. Sometimes he enlisted a little help:

	I had a character named Pete and I usually had him encountering all these different adventures on an isolated island. But that night I was running out of things for Pete to do, so I just asked [the kids] what they would do.7

His daughters Caroline and Andrea each gave a different answer, so Packard obligingly gave each their own ending. “What really struck me was the natural enthusiasm they had for the idea,” he later recalled. “And I thought: ‘Could I write this down?’”7

Packard had always wanted to be a writer, and he had drafted a handful of children’s books he’d never managed to sell. Practicing law had seemed a steadier way to support a family. But now the idea of a book that gave kids multiple pathways through a story wouldn’t leave his head. He started sketching flowcharts on the train to and from the office, working out the structural and organizational problems that arose with branching narratives and limited page counts. Eventually he had an outline for a book called The Adventures of You on Sugarcane Island. On the first page, a rogue wave sweeps “you” off a ship and you wake up on a deserted island:

	[…] lying high on a huge sand dune. Behind you is a broad, sloping beach. You watch the foaming waves thrashing upon it. Ahead of you is a meadow of tall reeds bounded by high rocky hills. You are hungry and thirsty. You look out at the ocean and see nothing but endless blue water. Except for a few sea gulls hovering over the waves, you are all alone.

	If you decide to walk along the beach, turn to page 5.

	If you decide to climb the rocky hill, turn to page 6.

Packard hadn’t been the first to imagine such a book, or even to write one. Storytelling pioneers of various eras had toyed with narratives that contained their own rules for navigation. The 1930 novel Consider the Consequences! by Doris Webster and Mary Alden promised “a brand new idea in fiction—a story which ends in any one of a dozen or more different ways, depending entirely on the taste of the individual reader,” that included choice points like this one:

	The reader who thinks she will be wise to avoid argument and trouble by eloping turns to paragraphs H-3. The one who thinks she would better decide to return home, determined to face the music and go through with her marriage in spite of opposition, turns to paragraphs H-4.

Other books, stage shows, or radio programs had tried one-off experiments with audience participation, letting the reader or audience decide which direction a story should go. The 1935 play Night of January 16th asked twelve random audience members to serve as jurors for a courtroom drama and render a verdict before the final curtain. Two different endings could unfold depending on their decision. In the 50s and 60s, experiments in “programmed learning” led to a textbook series called Tutor Texts, with multiple-choice questions where each answer instructed the student to turn to a different page; incorrect responses would offer immediate feedback about where the student had gone wrong. But few of these efforts had gained much traction. Each was created largely in ignorance of the others, and as experiments they were rarely repeated.

It seemed at first that the same would prove true for Packard’s book. He didn’t know of any earlier attempts to create interactive novels, nor was he familiar with the still-nascent experiments with computer games happening at distant universities. But he thought his idea had potential. A friend in New York, who worked for the William Morris Agency, helped Packard find a literary agent who dutifully shopped Sugarcane Island around to publishers. There were no takers. After six months Packard abandoned the project. He kept practicing law, and might have done so until retirement except for a coincidental fluke years later.

In 1975, Packard was in Vermont and happened to be browsing through the spring issue of Vermont Life, one of those colorful grandparent magazines filled with recipes, photos of barn raisings, and feature stories on interesting fences. He read a profile of a small local company that published children’s books and games, run by a couple named Connie and Ray Montgomery. With what the magazine assured the reader was typical Vermonter verve, the Montgomerys felt their books were doing something a little different: they were “specifically and exclusively for children”:

	Most children’s books are significantly designed with the buyer in mind—the parent or grandparent … the distribution and displays are geared to the purchaser not the child.… We want the child reader to get involved in what he is reading and experiencing. He should identify with the subject.… He is learning to read, but in the process he is also learning about himself.5

Something in the article sparked Packard’s imagination—maybe the photos of children clustered around one of the Montgomerys’ prototype books, which they took to local schools to try out on the kids rather than relying on adult opinions. The New York publishing suits hadn’t given it a chance, but Packard’s own children had appreciated the value of a story where they got to make decisions. Maybe Vermont Crossroads Press would too.

Ray Montgomery had been involved with “active learning” for years. After working as both a high school and college instructor, he’d developed roleplaying scenarios for Peace Corps volunteers, giving them practice negotiating tense scenarios they might encounter abroad. He had also helped run a summer school for remedial learners with a focus on so-called experiential learning: “the most powerful way for kids, or for anyone, to learn something.”9 So he was primed to be receptive when Packard approached him with a book that invited the reader to play along with the story. Before long they’d struck a deal to publish Sugarcane Island. Released in 1976 as an oversized hardcover, the book had a red-and-green dust jacket with a hopeful banner on the cover: The Adventures of You Series.

Even before the book’s release, Montgomery knew he had something good on his hands. “I Xeroxed 50 copies of Ed’s manuscript and took it to a reading teacher in Stowe. His kids—third grade through junior high—couldn’t get enough of it.”4 Everywhere he took the book, the reaction was the same. But Vermont Crossroads was too small an operation to make much impact. Montgomery quickly wrote a second Adventures of You book, but it also languished in obscurity. Packard, growing frustrated, had resumed shopping the concept around to other publishers, and in 1977 he struck a deal with Lippincott to release two new choice-based books, Deadwood City (1978) and The Third Planet from Altair (1979). Each used the phrase “choose your own adventures” on the cover as part of its banner text, but not yet as the name of a series.

Montgomery was also looking for a bigger fish, and he found one in Bantam Books. A young acquisitions editor there, Joëlle Delbourgo, immediately saw the idea’s potential: “My first reaction was that it was a brilliant concept and, to make an impact, you had to publish it as a series with a unifying cover concept.”4 When it turned out neither Lippincott nor Packard had registered a trademark on “choose your own adventure,” Bantam snatched it up, offering a regular writing contract to both Packard and Montgomery as a consolation prize. In July 1979 Packard’s The Cave of Time hit bookshops, branded on the cover as Choose Your Own Adventure #1. The dedication noted that “the concept, title, and editorial assistance” for the book had been provided by Packard’s daughter Andrea.

Cave opens immediately with your discovery of a mysterious cave on a visit to your uncle’s remote ranch. Stepping inside, you begin to feel unaccountably nervous. Hurrying back out reveals the world has changed, and you soon realize you’ve been transported to the midst of an Ice Age thousands of years earlier. You can choose to stay and explore this prehistoric world, or go back into the cave and try to find a way back to your own time. But each tunnel leads to a different place and epoch of history. Across the book’s branches you can find yourself in colonial America, medieval Europe, the time of the dinosaurs, or an era beyond the death of the sun. You can witness such “best of” moments as Lincoln’s writing of the Gettysburg Address, the sinking of the Titanic, or the building of the Great Wall of China.

A recurring choice is between staying in a strange world to try building a new life there or risking danger to return to the cave, hoping to find a way back to your familiar home:

	Soon you are sitting in front of a huge beach fire, cooking crabs and eating buana cake. Having never had a visitor before, your hosts are happy to see you. They welcome you into their society. Gradually you learn their language. They boys tell you they are your brothers; the girls that they are your sisters.

	You enjoy life in this new paradise, but you still wonder whether there might be a way to get back to the Cave of Time. Your new friends are unable to help. Perhaps if you journeyed inland you could find some who could. Your friends warn you against trying, however. They tell you that you will find only terrible jungles and rivers filled with crocodiles.
	 
	If you remain with your new friends, turn to page 62.

	If you journey inland, turn to page 63.

The branches in the book come often, with rarely more than two pages passing without a choice. This means each pathway is quite short, taking a reader only ten to fifteen minutes to read—a chunk of time nicely aligned with the length of a bus ride or school recess. While later books in the series would slow down the pacing of choices to enable longer pathways with more plot and character development—and would therefore, by necessity, merge branches much more aggressively, decreasing the reader’s agency over the plot—The Cave of Time treats each choice as a true divergence. Readers can discover forty different endings, from being eaten by the Loch Ness Monster to becoming a ship captain to riding a mammoth off the edge of a cliff:

	Thousands of years later when Dr. Carleton Frisbee, the famous paleontologist, finds your bones next to those of a wooly mammoth in the Red Creek excavation, he is amazed at how closely you resemble a twentieth-century human being.

    The End

Bantam’s marketing director Barbara Marcus took on the challenge of selling the unusual book. “A children’s paperback series [didn’t] have dollars, display space, or reviews” in those days, Marcus later recalled.4 Kids’ books were often treated as filler, distributed at random to bookshops along with more profitable adult books, with the stores left to figure out what to do with them. When asked how she promoted the new series, Marcus remembered, “We did absolutely nothing except give the books away. We gave thousands of the books to our salesmen and told them to give five to each bookseller and tell him to give them to the first five kids into his shop.” The decision to print the books in standard paperback size, rather than an oversized children’s format, was also shrewd: younger readers felt like they were reading a real, grown-up book, and early teens didn’t have to feel self-conscious about being seen with one. The numbering, too, was a clever idea, suggesting there were other titles you were missing out on and encouraging kids to trade books or fill in the gaps in their collections. The series soon became a massive success.

While the format would seem to offer little room for experimentation, some books pushed tentatively against its boundaries. In Inside UFO 54-40 (Choose Your Own Adventure #12), the winning ending—finding a legendary antiauthoritarian utopia—exists only on a page you are never instructed to turn to. Trouble on Planet Earth (#29) changes the reality of the story with each choice you make; it’s less a book about exploring alternate choices than alternate universes.  Hyperspace (#21) features all manner of time-and-space bending threads, including a branching book within a branching book and Edward Packard, the author, showing up in his own story.

As CYOA’s popularity surged, dozens of competitor series arrived, cementing the hold of a genre later known as gamebooks. Some series like Fighting Fantasy targeted older teens and experimented with more gamelike systems, asking players to track discovered items or remaining hit points, with some choices available only when your character was in a particular state. Other series with educational bents required math or programming challenges to unlock the next page to turn to. Some gamebooks experimented with older audiences or less pulpy aesthetics: the pages of 1985’s MAZE, by Christopher Manson, render an explorable, puzzle-filled mansion in enigmatic drawings, with a real-world prize of $10,000 offered to the first person to find the optimal pathway through its labyrinth of numbered doors.

But the original Choose Your Own Adventures remained the most popular. The franchise would become one of the most extraordinary successes in the history of publishing, eventually selling 250 million copies—one of the bestselling children’s book series of all time. The New York Times in 1981 said the CYOA books were “as contagious as chicken pox.”4 “Kids can’t stop reading” them, the colophon of some books in the series proclaimed, and in an era when concerns about screen time (on televisions) were gaining traction, adults saw no reason to stop them. “In 20 years of teaching,” one educator wrote, “I have never seen 12-year-olds so excited about anything as they are about Choose Your Own Adventure.”2 Bantam decided to accelerate the pace of releases to one new title a month, and in 1981 Packard gave up his law practice to write full time. He would go on to pen dozens of books in the series.

What made CYOA so popular, and why did that popularity come when it did? The Cave of Time hit shelves almost precisely in sync with the first commercial adventure games, and it’s often been assumed that one event inspired the other. And yet this seems not to have been the case. “I remember first encountering [CYOA books] after PC-based adventure games came out,”8 Infocom’s Dave Lebling recalled, assuming they were some kind of knockoff from a jealous traditional media. But neither Packard nor Montgomery were familiar with early computer games either.

The real answer may lie far deeper in the cultural subconscious. Historian Eli Cook has suggested the series caught the headwinds of a massive cultural shift from the postwar, post-Depression era of “stability, solidarity, security, and safety” to free agency and plentiful choices as desirable cultural values.2 The previous generation had “married young, many to their high-school sweethearts,” Cook writes. “Most workers preferred career-long job security to flighty labor flexibility.” But those values were giving way to more flexible arrangements both at home and at work, as well as “the conservative turn of the early 1980s, in which it came to be broadly assumed that one’s success was not dependent on gender, race, class … but rather stemmed solely from the individual life decisions one made.” Cook draws parallels between the CYOA books’ claims that “you and YOU ALONE are in charge of what happens in this story,” that “you are responsible because you choose,” and Reagan Republicans cutting welfare programs because people in poverty had only themselves to blame—they’d simply made poor choices. But this wasn’t just a conservative turn: the language of abortion-rights advocates settled on “pro-choice” in the 1980s, Cook notes, while ad campaigns across the country were switching to second-person slogans like Have It Your Way or This Bud’s for You. Self-determination had become the watchword of the day, and individual agency the most potent application of American freedom.

Whether you buy this cultural psychoanalysis or not, it’s unarguable that the books struck a powerful generational chord with younger readers. Packard had a simpler explanation for their success: “Kids love to die,” he quipped,7 recalling with fondness the cowboy games he’d once played with his brother where “it was always more fun to go into death throes.” Sensitive to claims the books appealed more to boys than girls, Packard pointed to a fan letter from a young lady reviewer: “I got a spear in my back and went in quicksand,” she wrote, “but other than that the book was great.” In fact, both Packard and Montgomery had taken pains to author their stories without any assumptions about the reader’s gender, and in The Cave of Time neither the text nor artwork betrays this conceit: the illustrations usually draw the short-haired protagonist with their back to the viewer. Later books in the series, however, began to use artwork that showed a generic blond white boy as each story’s hero. “Bantam insisted it be a boy because they had market research that said girls would identify with boys but boys would never read a book where ‘you’ was a girl,” Packard later explained, musing, “I think we lost a great number of girls” to copycat series less afraid to pursue a feminine demographic.11

Choose Your Own Adventure books remained bestsellers well into the 90s, though they slowly lost ground to digital interactive entertainments as computers and video game consoles became affordable for more and more families. The series ended its original run in 1998. Edward Packard cowrote the final book with the same person who’d inspired him since the beginning, a successful adult now with her own career: his daughter Andrea.

Even after its demise, the series would remain the most common cultural touchstone for interactive stories for the next twenty years. No one quite predicted the long-term impact the books would have, despite the wild success of their initial run. A 1981 profile of Packard entitled “He Chose His Own Adventure” paints a fond picture of an unlikely text games godfather at the beginning of his second career, which seemed to suit him far better than his first:

	These days, instead of drawing up legal briefs, Packard reclines on the couch in his Madison Avenue law office. Surrounded by the dark leather-bound statute books he has abandoned, he draws outlines that look like trees. Each branch carries an option, each option sprouts into more options and every leaf represents an ending.

	Then he writes.7


References

1) Ashwell, Sam Kabo. 2011. “CYOA Structure: The Cave of Time.” These Heterogenous Tasks (blog). Aug 5, 2011. heterogenoustasks.wordpress.com/2011/08/05/cyoa-structures-the-cave-of-time | a Jun 11, 2020 
2) Cook, Eli. 2020. “Rearing Children of the Market in the ‘You’ Decade: Choose Your Own Adventure Books and the Ascent of Free Choice in 1980s America.” Journal of American Studies, Feb 12, 2020.
3) Debnam, Betty. 1984. “Meet the Author of the ‘Choose Your Own Adventure’ Stories.” The Ledger (Lakeland, FL), Mar 27, 1984, Sunrise Edition, p. 7D.
4) Harmetz, Aljean. 1981. “‘Choose Your Own Adventure’ and Make Your Own Ending.” New York Times, Aug 25, 1981, sec. Books. 
5) Heinzerling, Ann Day. 1975. “The Crossroads Press.” Vermont Life, Spring 1975.
6) Katz, Demian. 1998. “Demian’s Gamebook Web Page.” gamebooks.org | a Jun 11, 2020
7) Kraft, Scott. 1981. “He Chose His Own Adventure.” The Day (New London, CT), Oct 10, 1981, sec. Business/Finance.
8) Lebling, David. 2011. “David Lebling Interview.” Interview by Grady Hendrix. Blog. www.gradyhendrix.com/david-lebling-interview | s July 11, 2011
9) Montgomery, R.A. 2011. “RA Montgomery Interview.” 2011 Interview by Grady Hendrix. Blog. www.gradyhendrix.com/ra-montgomery-interview | a Jun 11, 2020
10) Munger, Sean. 2013. “Choosing Adventure: The Edward Packard Interview.” seanmunger.com. Aug 16, 2013. seanmunger.com/2013/08/15/choosing-adventure-the-edward-packard-interview-part-i | a Jun 11, 2020
11) Packard, Edward. 2011. “Edward Packard Interview.” Interview by Grady Hendrix. Blog. www.gradyhendrix.com/edward-packard-interview | a Jun 11, 2020
12) Robinson, Sean Michael. 2010. “The Forked Path- Childhood, Death and the Choose Your Own Adventure.” The Hooded Utilitarian (blog). Sep 23, 2010. hoodedutilitarian.com/2010/09/9447 | s Aug 15, 2011
13) Rossen, Jake. 2014. “A Brief History of ‘Choose Your Own Adventure.’” Mental Floss (blog). Apr 10, 2014. www.mentalfloss.com/article/56160/brief-history-choose-your-own-adventure | a Jun 11, 2020
