The 1980s


The 80s rang in the dawn of a computer game industry. Led by companies like Adventure International 1978, Brøderbund, and On-Line Systems (later Sierra On-Line), it would grow from one- or two-person teams in garages to a $5 billion market by the end of the decade. Text games were a crucial part of that industry’s foundation, though not the first bricks laid: Sierra’s graphic adventure Mystery House hit the home computer market half a year before Infocom’s Zork. Indeed, Infocom’s founders had been advised that making text-only games was a mistake—but for a while, it was so much easier to make text look good than graphics. Sixty-four kilobytes wasn’t enough space to hold more than a few primitive line drawings, but Frost or Faulkner would have found it quite roomy. At the start of the decade it was still hard to imagine home computers as the future of art, but the future of fiction seemed closer to hand.

Text games were commercially viable through most of the 80s, charting alongside or even above graphical games. Zork was the industry’s bestselling game in 1982, and The Hitchhiker’s Guide to the Galaxy 1984 was outselling hits like King’s Quest [Sierra On-Line 1984] in early 1985. Adventure 1976—with its immersive second-person prose, natural language text parser, and gameplay focused on exploration and puzzles—had become first a template for mainframe text games, then a model for home computer imitators. The command line where anything might be typed, a familiar interface for early computer users, aligned with the blue-sky feel of the times. In the new digital realm, possibilities seemed endless.

Like early computers themselves, parser games could be fascinating to meddle with but frustrating to master. ELIZA and SHRDLU had foreshadowed many of the difficulties with software that playfully pretended (or earnestly tried) to understand its users, but it would take more time and perspective for the lessons to sink in. Text adventure UI was hard to learn even before attaching it to games with difficult puzzles; “feelings of frustration and humiliation are therefore quite common in one’s initial encounter with interactive fiction,” wrote some of the earliest humanities scholars to study the form. Like any medium from opera to anime, parser games developed their own tropes, conventions, and shorthand that could be off-putting or baffling to outsiders. Fans learned which verbs and command forms were likely to be understood, but newcomers often struggled. This book won’t belabor the point, but it’s worth making once: most encounters with parser games through history have looked less like the successful transcripts usually shown, and more like this.

	> hello there
	I DO NOT KNOW THE WORD " THERE."
	> where am I
	I DO NOT KNOW THE WORD " WHERE "
	> get up
	I SEE NOTHING TO TAKE
	> go
	I SEE NOTHING TO GO THROUGH
	> go out the dor
	I DO NOT KNOW THE WORD " DOR."
	> go out the door
	I DO NOT KNOW THE VERB " GO OUT "
	> help
	YOU'RE DOING FINE.
	> no i'm not
	I DO NOT KNOW THE WORD " I'M "

Even to fans, text adventures could be frustrating—but also at times exhilarating, transporting, and deeply satisfying to those who learned their rhythms and mastered their riddles. A handful of companies sprang up to specialize in interactive fiction, often attracting passionate fans more well-read and well-rounded than those the game industry as a whole would increasingly cater to. Many were women, over forty, or primarily interested in hobbies other than gaming. In the United States, Infocom became the most famous text game studio, cultivating a reputation as masters of a form they were still in the midst of inventing. The Zork [1980–82] and Enchanter [1983–85] trilogies, murder mysteries Deadline [1982] and Suspect [1984], sci-fi sagas Planetfall [1983] and Suspended [1983], Lovecraftian hacker saga The Lurking Horror [1987], and pirate romance Plundered Hearts [1987] speak to the range of styles and audiences the company experimented with. Infocom set a bar for quality that later generations of amateurs 1993 would spend decades chasing, with titles like Trinity [1986] and A Mind Forever Voyaging 1985 hoping to elevate the form past genre tropes toward serious literature.

Other countries saw different kinds of text game scenes emerge, often shaped by the particulars of regional hardware availability or cultural convention. In Britain, studio Magnetic Scrolls (co-founded by twenty-two-year-old coder Anita Sinclair) garnered a reputation for ambitious text games with a wider range of styles and tones, including Corruption [1988], a crime thriller set in the world of high-stakes finances, and Fish! [1988], in which the player character is a dimension-hopping espionage agent who starts the game in the body of a goldfish. Level 9, run by three brothers and a sister out of High Wycombe, was a prolific UK text adventure publisher who released well-regarded puzzlers like Snowball [1983], ambitious social science fiction like The Worm In Paradise [1985], and offbeat comedy laden with homegrown British humor like Gnome Ranger [1987]. Hobbyist text games also proliferated in countries where tools to make them, such as The Quill [Gilsoft 1983], were widely distributed: Australian Dorothy Millard (later Dorothy Irene), one of countless game makers straddling the line between amateur and pro, wrote over a dozen self-published adventures in the late 80s and early 90s and advertised in publications like Commodore Network and Adventure Probe. Game magazines often ran competitions for fan adventures that awarded cash prizes and distribution offers to winners. Text games in languages other than English flourished in scenes from Spain to Czechoslovakia—although in areas slower to adopt personal computers, graphical games sometimes became standard before a text-only tradition could emerge.

A key to making text games a reproducible success for commercial profit (or amateur acclaim) was the development of domain-specific creation tools. While Adventure had been written in the general purpose language Fortran, text adventures featured much reusable code between games and a clear separation between the underlying system and a particular story, suggesting a stable engine and a domain-specific language would be useful for writing them. First-generation text game tools were often trade secrets, in-house languages and compilers with vaguely specified but much-hyped proprietary features—by today’s standards, often unwieldy and obtuse. But across the decade, a huge range of commercial and amateur engines emerged with the enticing promise of letting home users write their own adventures. An incomplete catalog includes The Quill (marketed as Adventure Writer in the US) but also Adventure Construction Set, Computer Novel Construction Set, Alan (Adventure Language), GAGS (Generic Adventure Game System), PAW (Professional Adventure Writer), TADS (Text Adventure Development System), AGT (Adventure Game Toolkit), and ADL (Adventure Definition Language). Many of these tools would gather loyal communities still improving and updating them decades later. 

While parser games quickly became an established form, many hoped it would not be the final one for interactive storytelling. Mirroring the broader game industry in the 80s, radical experiments and strange new ideas were still welcomed. Anything might prove to be the next big hit. Novelist Rob Swigart’s Portal [Activision 1986] gave players an interface to a futuristic database and asked them to piece together a story in fragments; Uncle Roger 1986 was another such “random-access narrative.” Canadian poet Barrie Nichol used his Apple IIe to make poetry for the screen that moved and mutated in First Screening: Computer Poems [1984]. Activision published Robert Pinsky’s surreal text game Mindwheel [1985]—a frustrating epic of astral projection, rock stars and dictators, and copious sonnets—as well as Alter Ego [1986], which took players through not a heroic quest but an ordinary life, from cradle to grave. Wilderness: A Survival Adventure [Electric Transit 1984] married a parser to a complex survival simulation. Star Saga: One [Masterplay 1988] combined a multiplayer computer strategy and trading game with megabytes of story text too large to fit on contemporary disks, printed instead in a stack of companion booklets with almost a thousand numbered sections. Even Infocom tried shaking up their formula, releasing games that played out in real time like Border Zone [1987], added RPG mechanics like Quarterstaff [1988], or unfolded in standalone vignettes rather than a single unified story as in Nord and Bert Couldn’t Make Head or Tail of It [1987].

One of the most creative of these experiments was The Prisoner [Edu-Ware 1980], based on the cult 1960s TV show about spies, mind games, and control. The game gives the player a three-digit number they’re charged never to reveal, then takes them through a far-ranging series of minigames that try to trick them into revealing it, including a city simulator, a priest chatbot, several mazes, a psych quiz, and various banks, gambling halls, and item shops. Pressing the Escape key at certain points, instead of quitting the game, shows the message “Such thoughts are punishable.” In the 1982 version, the game can accurately simulate a catastrophic crash, prodding the player to investigate its cause. The line number listed as the source of the “crash,” which most players would immediately type in by reflex to diagnose the problem, is the player’s secret code.

Printed gamebooks were also massively popular through the 80s. Choose Your Own Adventure became one of the bestselling young adult series in history, paving the way for dozens of paper competitors from Fighting Fantasy to Be an Interplanetary Spy to Give Yourself Goosebumps to Follow Your Heart Romance. The Micro Adventure gamebooks by Eileen Buckholtz and Ruth Glick cast readers as kid hackers, and included real BASIC programs to type in and run to decode cyphers or overcome obstacles. Play-by-mail games also grew increasingly popular during the decade, lettings users interact through pencil and paper with distant computers running complex simulations, some managing hundreds or thousands of players in the same virtual universe. Turns unfolded at the slow cadence of once every ten days or two weeks, leaving time for results to be mailed out through the postal system, strategies to be considered, and new orders to be sent back. Though online games like MUD and its successors were growing more sophisticated, their audience was still sharply limited by steep hourly connection fees. In contrast, play-by-mail let gamers explore shared virtual worlds for a few dollars a week and the cost of some postage stamps.

The power and capacity of home computers compounded exponentially throughout the decade, and the cost to store each byte of code and content plummeted. In 1980, a floppy drive with hundred-kilobyte disks was still a new and expensive add-on. For roughly the same price in 1990, you could get a CD-ROM drive reading discs that held half a gigabyte of data—five thousand times more. A new 486 PC in 1990 had just enough processing power to stream multimedia content off those discs: detailed images in the 256-color palette provided by the VGA standard, audio for your new sound card, even video. While a home computer that could read and write English was the hot tech demo in 1980, ten years later spoken dialogue and video clips stole the show. The decade ended with interactive text a dying breed on store shelves, another apparent victim of technological progress.

But the story was far from over. If anything, the history of text games was about to get even more interesting.


More Text Games from the 1980s

Note that this is an even more partial list than for other decades: the Interactive Fiction Database records well over 2,000 text adventure games released in the 1980s.

1980
Ghost Town (Scott Adams, Adventure International). Hidden treasures in a Wild West town. Haunt (John E. Laird, DEC-20). Haunted house puzzle game. Mystery House (Roberta Williams, On-Line Systems). First of Sierra’s hybrid parser/graphical adventure games. The Prisoner (David Mullich, Edu-Ware Services). Surreal game of paranoia based on the cult 60s TV show. Reality Ends (William F. Denman, Jr, Med Systems Software). Exploration of “parallel realities” via rooms with slightly differing descriptions. Rogue (Michael Toy et al., UNIX). RPG with ASCII art and procedurally generated dungeons; namesake of the roguelike genre. Warp (Rob Lucke and Bill Frolik, HP3000). Massive mainframe treasure hunt; parser lets users define macros and commands triggered by game state changes. 

1981
Cyborg (Mike Berlyn and Muffy Berlyn, Sentient Software). Sci-fi story about merging with an AI consciousness; same authors as Infocom’s Suspended 1983. The Golden Baton (Brian Howarth, Molimerx). First in the Mysterious Adventures series written using the Adventure International format. The Golden Voyage (William Demas and Scott Adams, Adventure International). Final text-only game from Adventure International. Madness & the Minotaur (Tom Rosenbaum, Spectral Associates). Punishingly difficult game with monsters and randomly-changing mazes. Planet of Death (Richard Turner and Chris Thornton, Arctic Computing). Perhaps the first commercially sold British text adventure. Saigon: The Final Days (Jyym and Robyn Pearson, Adventure International). Hybrid text/graphics; early example of engaging with a serious theme. Softporn Adventure (Chuck Benton, On-Line Systems). Sierra’s only all-text game, reworked later as graphical Leisure Suit Larry. Thunder Road Adventure (Don and Freda Boner, The Programmer’s Guild). Game about running moonshine in a ’57 Chevy by a father/daughter team. Zork II: The Wizard of Frobozz (Dave Lebling and Marc Blank, Infocom). Sequel, continuing to port content from the vast mainframe original. 

1982
Avon (Jon Thackray and Jonathan Partington, IBM System/370). Mainframe game in a Shakespearean fantasy world, later ported to micros by Topologika. Avventura nel castello (Enrico Colombini and Chiara Tovena, Dinosoft). Probably the first Italian interactive fiction game. Countdown to Doom (Peter D. Kilworth, Topologika). Explore an alien planet on a tight timer to find parts to fix your crashed ship. Deadline (Marc Blank, Infocom). Murder mystery with characters to question; early example of complex conversational NPCs. Dunnet (Ron Schnell, DECSYSTEM-20). Cyberpunk mainframe game, most famous for a 1992 port included in Emacs, thus making its way into millions of Linux-based operating systems including Mac OS X. The Mask of the Sun (Alan B. Clark et al., Ultrasoft). Aztec tomb-robbing game, parser/graphical hybrid. Middle-Earth Trilogy (Peter Austin et al., Level 9) aka Jewels of Darkness. Trilogy expanding on Adventure 1976. Starcross (Dave Lebling, Infocom). Explore a mysterious alien spaceship filled with logic puzzles. The Warlock of Firetop Mountain (Steve Jackson and Ian Livingstone, Puffin Books). First of the successful Fighting Fantasy gamebook series. Zork III: The Dungeon Master (Dave Lebling and Marc Blank, Infocom). Difficult end to the trilogy takes steps toward moving on from cave-set treasure hunts.

1983
Beyond the Tesseract (David Lo, TRS-80). Ambitious game involving journeys through mathematical spaces and manipulation of abstract concepts. The Curse (Gilsoft). Early Quill game in which a fortune teller transports you to ancient Egypt. Enchanter (Marc Blank and Dave Lebling, Infocom). Start of post-Zork trilogy using magic words to solve puzzles; includes spells frotz, gnusto, and nitfol, later to name fan-made IF tools. Infidel (Mike Berlyn, Infocom). Tomb-robbing puzzler with a surprise twist. Kingdom of Hamil (Jonathan Partington and Jonathan Thackray, Acornsoft), aka Hamil. Port of puzzle game for the Phoenix mainframe at Cambridge. Lords of Time (Sue Gazzard and Ian Buxton, Level 9). Time travel scavenger hunt, start of Time and Magik trilogy. MegaWars (CompuServe). Clone of DECWARS and Super Star Trek 1974; early multiplayer space shooter. Planetfall (Steve Meretzky, Infocom). Sci-fi comedy remembered for robot buddy Floyd. Snowball (Mike Austin et al., Level 9). Hero Kim Kimberly awakens from hibernation aboard a hijacked starship. Twin Kingdom Valley (Trevor Hall and P. M. Skinner, Bug-Byte Software). Text/graphics hybrid with wandering NPCs. Le Vampire Fou (Jean‑Louis Le Breton, Ciel Bleu). First commercial French text adventure. The Witness (Stu Galley, Infocom). Noir murder mystery. 

1984
Back In Time (Stella MacDonald, Blue Ridge Software Company). Educational text/graphics hybrid wherein your schoolbus travels to the age of dinosaurs. Cutthroats (Michael Berlyn and Jerry Wolper, Infocom). Treasure hunt through sunken shipwrecks; some frustrating bugs and design. Drug Wars (John E. Dell, DOS). Buy and sell as a New York dealer; inspired many later imitators. First Screening: Computer Poems (bpNichol, Underwhich). Collection of kinetic poetry for the screen. Flight from the Dark (Joe Dever, Sparrow Books) aka Lone Wolf #1. First in popular gamebook series with RPG elements. Hampstead (Trevor Lever and Peter Jones, Melbourne House). Social satire notable for being an early game to tackle contemporary political issues. L: A Mathemagical Adventure (Association of Teachers of Mathematics, BBC Micro). Widely played British edugame with logic and math puzzles. Racter (William Chamberlain and Thomas Etter, Mindscape). Chatbot famous for allegedy writing a whimsical book, The Policeman’s Beard is Half-Constructed. Rendezvous with Rama (Lee Jacknow and Ronald Martinez, Trillium). Based on the Clarke novel. Return to Eden (Nick Austin et al., Level 9). Sequel to Snowball takes Kim to an alien colony world and a city being built by robots. Seastalker (Jim Lawrence and Stu Galley, Infocom). Underwater adventure targeted at younger readers. Sorcerer (Steve Meretzky, Infocom). Second in Enchanter trilogy. Space Attack: Micro Adventure #1 (Eileen Buckholtz and Ruth Glick, Scholastic). Start of gamebook series with BASIC programs for readers to type in and run. Suspect (Dave Lebling, Infocom). Murder mystery with NPCs taking independent actions. System 15000 (John Wagstaff, AVS). Early hacking simulator. Trade Wars (Chris Sherrick, BASIC). First version of space trading made famous by 1991 remake. Yenght (Víctor Ruiz Tejedor, Dinamic). Fantasy adventure text/graphics hybrid, one of the earliest in Spanish. Zauberschloß (Dennis Merbach, BASIC). Type-in fantasy adventure, one of the earliest known German text games. Zyll (Marshal Linder and Scott Edwards, IBM). Even Big Blue got into text adventures with this treasure hunt featuring two-player cooperative or competitive play.

1985
2010: The Text Adventure Game (Michael Price et al., Coleco). Tie-in to the Kubrick/Clarke sequel with multiple choice interface. Essex (Bill Darrah and William Mataga, Brøderbund). Real-time sci-fi adventure billed as an “electronic novel” with conversational NPCs. Island of Kesmai (John Taylor and Kelton Flinn, Kesmai). Early commercial MUD on CompuServe with roguelike elements; evolved from 1980 Dungeons of Kesmai. Mindwheel (Robert Pinsky et al., Brøderbund). Trippy poetic saga about entering the minds of four famous people; frustrating but unique. Nine Princes in Amber (Mike Amadeo et al., Telarium). Ambitious attempt to adapt the Zelazny novel into a truly interactive story. The Pawn (Rob Steggles et al., Magnetic Scrolls). British studio’s ambitious debut game. The Rats (GXT/Five Ways Software, Hodder & Stoughton). Bookware adaptation of horror novel; unusual strategic, structural, and typographical elements. The Secret of St. Bride’s (Priscilla Langridge, St. Bride’s School). First of the unusual releases from the Games Mistresses 1992. Spellbreaker (Dave Lebling, Infocom). Challenging conclusion to Enchanter trilogy. Wilderness: A Survival Adventure (Wesley Huntress and Charles Kohlhase, Electric Transit). Detailed survival simulator. Wishbringer (Brian Moriarty, Infocom). Introductory fantasy aimed at younger adventurers, with a way to wish away hard puzzles. The Worm in Paradise (Mike Austin et al., Level 9). Surreal “utopia” in a far-future city.  

1986
Alter Ego (Peter J. Favaro, Activision). Branching-path story about the life of an ordinary person; sold in male and female versions. Amnesia (Thomas M. Disch and Kevin Bentley, Electronic Arts). Bizarre Manhattan-set game based on 400-page manuscript by the famous author. Ballyhoo (Jeff O’Neill, Infocom). Circus mystery. Beyond the Titanic (Scott Miller, Apogee). First game from studio later known for action games. Breakers (Rod Smith, Brøderbund). Ambitious sci-fi with complex NPCs and worldbuilding. Bugsy (Priscilla Langridge, St. Bride’s/CRL Group). Play a cartoon rabbit gangster trying to take over Chicago in this “advencha” parody. Dracula (Rod Pike, CRL Group). Well-written, if frustrating, take on the Bram Stoker novel. Hollywood Hijinx (Dave Anderson and Liz Cyr-Jones, Infocom). Treasure hunt in a Malibu mansion stuffed with movie-themed puzzles. Leather Goddesses of Phobos (Steve Meretzky, Infocom). Comedy send-up of pulp sci-fi, famous for scratch ’n sniff feelie. Moonmist (Stu Galley and Jim Lawrence, Infocom). Gothic ghost story at a haunted castle, with four different plot variants based on which “favorite color” you pick. Portal (Rob Swigart, Activision). Novel in nonlinear fragments about an astronaut returning to Earth after a hundred-year mission. The Price of Magik (Pete Austin et al., Level 9). Dark fantasy with sprawling map and spells that drain age and sanity. The Rim Worlds War (Jessica Mulligan, GEnie). Space strategy game; early commercial play-by-email title. Trinity (Brian Moriarty, Infocom). Finely crafted time-travel parable about nuclear war.  

1987
AberMUD (Alan Cox et al., B). First popular open-source MUD; engine later forked into many influential variants. Beyond Zork (Brian Moriarty, Infocom). Adds RPG elements and a revised layout to quest for the Coconut of Quendor. The Big Sleaze (Fergus McNeill, Delta 4). Three-episode parody of hardboiled detective stories. Border Zone (Marc Blank, Infocom). Iron Curtain spy thriller with three viewpoint characters and a real-time clock. Bureaucracy (Douglas Adams et al., Infocom). A quest to get your bank to acknowledge a change-of-address form; just as frustrating as it sounds. Escape from ANTcatraz (Lorri Hopping, Scholastic). Play as an ant helping your colony escape capture. Gnome Ranger (Pete Austin, Level 9). Introduced fan-favorite hero Ingrid Bottomlow. The Guild of Thieves (Rob Steggles, Magnetic Scrolls). Text/graphics hybrid with an already-retro treasure hunt vibe. Jacaranda Jim (Graham Cluley, DOS). Shareware adventure; example of rise of amateur games spread via BBS. Jinxter (Georgina Sinclair and Michael Bywater, Magnetic Scrolls). Goofy romp through a fantasy world filled with very British humor. Knight Orc (Pete Austin, Level 9). Well-regarded adventure where you play the bad guy; real-time roving NPCs. The Lurking Horror (Dave Lebling, Infocom). Hackers and Lovecraftian horror on an MIT-like college campus. Nord and Bert Couldn’t Make Head or Tail of It (Jeff O’Neill, Infocom). Collection of standalone vignettes that take wordplay to solve. Quarterstaff (Scott D. Schmitz and Kenneth M. Updike, Simulated Environment Systems). Adventure/RPG hybrid later updated and rereleased by Infocom. Stationfall (Steve Meretzky, Infocom). Sequel to Planetfall set on an abandoned space station. Varitale (Timothy S. Campbell, Pinnacle). BBS choose-your-path game allowing players to extend the story when they got to an unwritten branch. 

1988
The Beast of Torrack Moor (Linda Wright, Zenobi). Mystery set in the English countryside with dynamic NPCs. Corruption (Rob Steggles and Hugh Steers, Magnetic Scrolls). Corporate espionage in a timing-based mystery. Dr. Dumont’s Wild P.A.R.T.I. (Muffy Berlyn and Mike Berlyn, First Row). A mad scientist zaps you into a virtual reality filled with metaphors for particle physics. Federation II (Alan Lenton, Compunet). Early nonfantasy MUD; ran near-continuously into the 2020s. Fish! (John Molloy et al., Magnetic Scrolls). Quirky game about a dimension- and body-hopping secret agent. GemStone (Simutronics, GEnie). Another long-running MUD; survived commercially for decades as GemStone IV. Hidden Agenda (Jim Gasperini, Springboard). Politics sim set in Central America with strategy elements and multiple-choice scenarios. Lancelot (Christina Erskin et al., Level 9). Serious Arthurian adventure with extensive descriptive prose. The Lost Crown of Queen Anne (Robert Wayne Atkins, Softdisk). Shareware text game with elaborate UI. Mindfighter (Anna Popkess and Fergus McNeill, Activision). Postapocalyptic epic about a kid psychic fighting to survive. QuantumLink Serial (Tracy Reed, Quantum). Early weekly serial on the service that would become AOL, told in emails and chatrooms; author would incorporate reader participation in next week’s installment. Sherlock: The Riddle of the Crown Jewels (Bob Bates, Infocom). One of Infocom’s last pure-text adventures. Star Saga: One (Richard Dutton et al., Masterplay). Space trading game with unusual format: huge passages of descriptive text printed in companion booklets referenced in the game by numbers.  

1989
Agatha’s Folly (Linda Wright, Zenobi). Well-regarded Quill-written murder mystery at a country cottage. Arthur: The Quest For Excalibur (Bob Bates, Infocom). One of Infocom’s final text game titles. Avalon (Yehuda Simmons and Daniel James, Hourglass). Fantasy MUD, one of the oldest continuously operating. Demon’s Tomb—The Awakening (Simon Price, Virgin Mastertronic). Modern-set horror with nice UI features. Genesis (Lars Pensjö, LPMud). First world for the popular LPMud software. The Glory of Kings (Agema Publications, play-by-mail), aka La Gloire Du Roi. Play-by-mail game of eighteenth-century war and diplomacy; some games ran for more than a real-world decade. James Clavell’s Shogun (Dave Lebling, Infocom). Unsuccessful adaptation of the famous novel. Journey: The Quest Begins (Marc Blank, Infocom). Fantasy story told in a past-tense diary format; graphics and UI experiments. Legend of the Red Dragon (Seth Robinson, Robinson Technologies), aka LORD. Popular BBS door game with fighting and flirting. Myth (Paul Findley, Magnetic Scrolls). Journey to the underworld of ancient Greece. Quantum Space (Don Daglow, AOL). Popular play-by-email game. Scapeghost (Pete Austin, Level 9). Ghosts and gangsters; last from Level 9. Son of Stagefright (Mike McCauley, AGT). Community theater shenanigans; winner of the 1989 Softworks AGT Competition. Zork Zero (Steve Meretzky, Infocom). Large open map; clickable UI. 
