Uncle Roger

1986

Judy Malloy
Style: Hypertext
Debuted: Dec 1, 1986 to Jan 29, 1987 (daily posts)
Launch Platform: The WELL BBS
Publisher: Art Com (1987–8 releases)
Language: Plain text (original); Unix shell scripts and AppleSoft BASIC (boxed version)

Opening Text:

	I drank too much red wine. The Broadthrow’s party is looping in my mind, nested with brief dreams and nightmares.


It’s 1969. A young woman in Boulder, Colorado, is working for an engineering firm that’s building the Orbiting Solar Observatory satellites, the world’s first space telescopes. She’s there to help computerize the firm’s databases, not build satellites, but she can’t help stopping by the viewing platform overlooking the clean room to watch this glorious piece of hardware be assembled. “People entered in lab coats,” she reminisced later. “The thing was gold, it was shining, it was huge, it was intricate. It was—beautiful. Absolutely beautiful.”3

And yet another part of her was sad. Outside of working hours, she was also an artist, and she’d struggled like all artists for even the smallest scraps of funding: fifty dollars for materials here, a weeklong residency there. Looking at the multimillion-dollar satellite, the culmination of a decade of expensive work, she realized no artist would ever have the budget to make something so incredible.

But then a different thought struck her. “Okay, an artist cannot create that,” she remembers thinking. “I cannot create an Orbiting Solar Observatory.… But an artist could use technology.” 

The woman was Judy Malloy, “a slight woman with sandy blonde hair”1 and infectious enthusiasm: when excited, she would lean sharply forward with widened eyes and gesture expansively, as if ideas might flow in and out through pupils or be captured by hands. Her mother had been a journalist and writer, and her father had read Homer to her and her brothers growing up. She got a degree in literature with a concentration in art, and she found a job at the Library of Congress working in “a huge, huge warehouse, full of card catalogs … to work on the cards, we rolled around on chairs.”15 In the mid-1960s such catalogs were just starting to be computerized, and Malloy jumped at the chance to become an expert in an emerging field, taking a Fortran class offered at one company she worked for. At that time the women there, as at many firms, weren’t allowed to wear pants or have long hair—she had to hide hers under a wig.

But when she let her hair down after work, Malloy had an entirely different life as a writer and performance artist. On a high school trip to New York, she’d slipped away to visit the Guggenheim and ended up hanging out with “two artists in their studio as they tossed back sips of whiskey and played chess.”4 As an adult she became active in local art spaces wherever she lived, turning her writing into spoken word performance pieces accompanied by slides, or into installations with her words projected on backgrounds or painted on canvas. She wrote single-page short stories and left mimeographed copies in bars, or passed them out on street corners. One New Year’s Eve found her

	on the streets of San Francisco, on Broadway and Columbus, dressed in red satin shorts and a blue satin cape passing out chapter 12 of SUPER LUCY, a serial about Lucy, a clerical worker, who encounters common workplace situations and problems and deals with them in unorthodox ways—leaving behind her a trail of bosses tied to their chairs with masking tape, system analysts locked in supply cabinets, and blatantly misfiled 3 x 5 cards.9

At first her work and her art stayed mostly separate. But by the end of the 70s she had become intrigued by the notion that databases, those mechanical and soulless ways of sorting and archiving huge stockpiles of information, might become distinctly modern tools of artistic expression. She had come up with a notion of “molecular narrative units”13 that could be accessed in different orders or recombined to create stories without traditional structure. She began to explore these ideas in her art. She founded a company called OK Research and wrote to big businesses requesting information for a new database she was compiling. She didn’t mention the database would be used not for generating new business leads, but for performance art. One OK Research installation surrounded the viewer with hundreds of blown-up texts taken from the piles of literature she’d received in the mail, enormous out-of-context koans like LIQUID CHROMATOGRAPHY IS AN ART and FOR ADVENTURE I WORK AT RAYCHEM and HERCULES PROFAX WILL SET YOU FREE.

Then she began to make custom artist’s books out of card catalogs. On each card she pasted a fragment of prose or imagery, and she labeled the index tabs with cut-up pieces of photographs. Readers could flip through the catalog to view cards in any order they liked, charting their own course through a story. Later she worked with battery-powered address books, in which sorted business cards could be accessed by the press of a button marked with a letter of the alphabet. Instead of professional contacts, Malloy filled hers with fiction. She removed the letters from the buttons to leave twenty-six blank keys—mechanical bookmarks to random sections of a story that the reader could push in any order they liked.

But the projects were frustrating. Each was time-consuming to create, and they could not be duplicated or shared. Malloy believed experimental literature should be circulated to a broad audience, not locked up in a gallery, but she could see no way to publish or distribute her database narratives.

It might seem odd in hindsight that Malloy hadn’t thought of using computers in her projects. But to her they were still the behemoths she’d been trained on, massive mainframes with restrictive hours, gatekeeping technicians, and maddeningly fiddly punch cards. By the 80s the personal computer had arrived, but also a divorce: in the middle of the decade Malloy was a single mom struggling to keep food on the table, and for a long time her own computer seemed a frivolous expense. In 1985 she finally bought a used Apple II, but mostly for her son, who did schoolwork and played Infocom games on it. She tinkered with commercial database software, but the computer mostly seemed a distraction from more serious work. She was almost forty-five years old, and it seemed an unlikely time for a radical change in direction.

But then change came to her, in the form of The WELL. Founded in 1985 by Stewart Brand, editor of the Whole Earth Catalog, WELL stood for Whole Earth ’Lectronic Link. The dial-up service had a mission of providing cheap access to online communities for the San Francisco Bay Area. Bulletin board systems were becoming more popular, offering email, information, and discussion boards, but most were still outrageously expensive, with some charging fifteen to twenty-five dollars per hour to connect. The WELL charged just three dollars an hour, and it aimed to be a democratizing space open to anyone, with a network of forums—“conferences,” in WELL-speak—on subjects ranging from parenting to rock music to technology to religion. An old friend of Malloy’s from the art world, Carl Loeffler, had been invited to bring his magazine Art Com onto the WELL with its own conference, the Art Com Electronic Network (ACEN). Loeffler’s magazine had a long tradition of experimenting with new formats, putting out issues on videocassette, audio tape, and microfiche. He hoped ACEN could be a place not only for art discussion but where artists could publish original, born-digital work. Loeffler invited Malloy to conceive of a piece that could be shown on ACEN.

It was as if all the threads of her life had come together. “I was struck, I was thrilled,” she later recalled:

	I already had those skills. I knew how to think about the algorithms, I knew how to do the basic programming.… I realized that I could do what I’d been trying to do with the card catalogs.… I started working on them before I could actually make the vision I had for the kind of literature they were meant to be into something real by using the Apple II. It was sitting on the desk in our house, you know, it was right there.15

On December 1, 1986, a new topic was created on ACEN called “A Party in Woodside,” the first “File” of a project known as Uncle Roger. Following in the Homeric tradition, Malloy had decided she would tell the story live, logging in each day to post new fragments—“records,” as she called them using database parlance—of a tale that would only make sense when a reader compiled its disparate threads for themselves, like a researcher following trails of references. Each record would hold only a few lines of the story, but each would be tagged with metadata: its relevant keywords.

	Uncle Roger usually wears tweed suits which look
	as if he has had them for a long time.
	He is short and plump, and when I was younger,
	I thought that his briefcase was glued to his right hand.

	Because one day when we picked him up at the station,
	he said to my Mother: “Given that I live on the train,
	I wish that they would serve martinis,”
	I also thought
	that he lived on the Boston & Maine.

	*uncle roger *family *jenny

Malloy at first urged readers to copy each record by hand into a local database program—something most tech-savvy WELL readers would have had on hand—and index them with the given keywords. As the story grew, they could find their own connections and pathways through it. She called it a Serial Novel for the Net, a random-access narrative, a database novel. Pretty soon she had a regular audience who would drop by the conference often to catch up on the latest pieces. “Somebody told me it was their bedtime story every day,”3 she remembers with a smile. Anyone could have posted in the original thread with the ongoing story, but no one ever did, keeping it clear for Malloy’s daily entries. (A second topic was later created for discussion of the piece.) Eventually some technical folks on ACEN helped Malloy make a tiny program out of Unix shell scripts that let readers search the posts by keyword or combinations of keywords, allowing even those without their own database software to access the story with its intended interface.

	choose one of
	the keywords below and type  it
	at the prompt

	jenny	puffy	uncle roger
	dreams	jane	miss gorgel
	jeff	jack	jenny’s family
	tom	dorrie	men in tan suits
	louise	rose	chips
	mark	laura	refreshments
	caroline	david	the house

	?  jenny

	do you want to combine another keyword with   jenny
	type  y  or   n

	?  y

	what keyword do you want to combine with   jenny

	?  jeff

	There is a funny feeling in my stomach,      
	and I can’t erase Jeff’s image. It hovers over my bed
	like the image of God when I said the prayer
	that began “Heavenly father hear my prayer, 
	keep me in your loving care”
	and lay in bed in the house in Massachusets.

	God was a sort of long, dark man 
	who hovered horizontally over me 
	and had no face.


	<return> or stop

Pressing return would show the next match with that combination of keywords, then the next and the next, leading inevitably to:

	There are no, or no more records that include
	 the keyword(s) you chose   jenny, jeff

The user could then try again with a new keyword search, continuing as long as they remained interested. The piece tracked no state and “Woodside” had no explicit ending, letting the user dictate the duration and style of their engagement.

The story that emerged from the fragmented records was unlike almost any that had previously been told on a computer: more literary, free of genre trappings, concerned with people and emotions more than objects and actions, and strongly tied to the time and place of its creation. Set in the Silicon Valley of the early 80s—when hardware, not software, was king—the story is narrated by a young woman named Jenny who has moved from the East Coast to California, much like Malloy had a decade earlier. Jenny takes a job nannying the kids of microchip tycoon Tom Broadthrow, and “Woodside” takes place at a party of chip industry movers and shakers held at the Broadthrows’ swanky home. “Like a guest at a real party,” Malloy wrote, “the reader hears snatches of conversation, observes what strangers are wearing and meets old friends. No single reader experiences the evening in the same way.”8 Her ex-husband had been a semiconductor engineer, so she drew from real experience in navigating the surreal excitement of an industry rapidly positioning itself as the center of a realigning world. Exploring Uncle Roger reveals a sometimes satiric, often familiar portrait of male-dominated tech culture and the women doing their best to survive within it.

	“There are many stories in the Valley,” said Dorrie.

	She was easy to listen to. Jane and I sat quietly. 

	“Some are fairy tales, but there are nightmares.    
	Look into the nightmares 
	and you’ll see Tom Broadthrow’s name
	every other page.”  

	I looked at Tom.  
	He has a slight build, sandy hair and a pleasant smile. 

	“Why do you work for him?”   

	“Someone has to protect the girls on the line.”   	

	<return> or stop   [return]

	Jeff kept talking about custom chips.
	He got very excited.  
	I looked into his eyes which are brown.
	I wanted him to keep talking.

	“What is a custom chip?” I asked.


	<return> or stop   [return]

	Mark cut through the thick green frosting of the cake,
	put a large slice on a paper plate
	that had pictures of snowmen running around its rim.
	“I have some photos of me surfing on my new surfboard,” he said.
	“They’re in my room. Do you want to see them.”

The most outlandish character is Jenny’s uncle Roger, an inveterate prankster and shameless womanizer who keeps turning up in the story like a bad penny. “He’s a semiconductor industry analyst,” Jenny notes when she first sees him arrive at the party. “He might even have been invited.” Piecing together enough records reveals Roger is involved in a chip espionage scheme, a real phenomenon from a time when the company that could make the fastest silicon could crush its competitors. Malloy calls Roger a Falstaffian character, since “you can’t tell who he is or what he’s doing throughout the story,”3 and since his aggressively lecherous behavior is intertwined with unexpected kindnesses and quick reversals.

The character of Uncle Roger might be read as standing in for all the frustratingly complex relationships with men that women in the tech industry have dealt with, in the 80s and every decade since. He pays Jenny’s tuition but hits on her friends; he’s family, but not to be trusted; he involves her in his schemes without asking for consent, but in the end gifts his stolen chip design to her boyfriend, wrapping up the story in an unlooked-for happy ending. “It’s the kind of trick that would happen in the theater this was based on,”3 Malloy observes. She deliberately conceived her story in the style of a jig, the bite-sized comic interludes that would bookend more serious stage drama in Shakespeare’s time: bawdy satires filled with stock characters, clowns and tricksters, and scheming villains. 

	He ate about 1/4 of the salmon cream cheese loaf,  
	from the end that Puffy [the cat] hadn’t licked.  
	“Where is the bathroom?” he asked. 

	“There are three upstairs,” I said. 
	“The one that adjoins Tom and Louise’s bedroom
	is closest to the top of the stairs.”  

	“Thank you”, said Uncle Roger.  
	He put a large chunk of sourdough baguette into his pocket 
	and headed upstairs, whispering “Be careful, Jenny,
	this is a dangerous household.” 

But the story is also about Jenny coming into her own, learning to assert herself and define her place in the new terrains of both California and a world increasingly dominated by technology. Malloy later extended the story with two more Files that interweave more of Jenny’s flashbacks and dreams into the narrative, framing them as the thoughts of a wandering mind during a tedious new job at a word processing center.

	The woman at the station to my left is typing steadily. 
	Her husband is an IBM salesman, and she 
	keeps his picture in a small silver frame 
	beside her computer. 

	Cold water dripped down my face. 
	I looked at myself 
	in the mirror of the ladies room. 
	David wanted me to go back East with him. 
	I was having dinner with Jeff next Monday. 
	Uncle Roger wanted me to be a file clerk. 
	  
	Water splashes had left dark spots on the front 
	of my gray sweater. I took off the silver 
	barrette which held my hair away from my face 
	and put it in my pocketbook. 


	“Do you have any money?” he asked.

	“Only about $5.00 ,” I said.
	He reached in his back pocket,
	pulled out his wallet, and handed it to me.
	“See if I’ve got any,” he said.
	David had over $50.00 in his wallet.
	In a side pocket was a picture of Linda.
	I took it out and looked at it. She was
	wearing a white sun dress, and her long red hair 
	was blowing around her face. 
	David was looking at the road.
	I tore the picture into little pieces and
	put it back in the pocket of his wallet.
	“You have about $50.00,” I said. 

A woman’s story had never been told like this in a text game. While there had been a handful of earlier female protagonists and women authors, those stories had rarely strayed beyond genre archetypes or delved into the inner lives of their characters. Jenny was one of the first women in a digital fiction to be more than a cardboard cutout, with a voice perhaps inevitably shaped by the technology her creator had used to write it. “I was not a poet when I started writing Uncle Roger,” Malloy recalls:

	But there was a fifty-character limitation on Datanet.… So I kept each line to fifty characters. You can see that in the way Uncle Roger flows. [It’s] a bit choppy: but that’s Jenny’s voice also. It flows that way. I wrote to the fifty characters. Well, by the time I was finished with three Files and three hundred lexias writing to fifty characters—I was a poet.3

Malloy finished her original telling of “A Party in Woodside” at the end of January 1987, with a record consisting solely of the three words END OF DATA. Over the next year she would create File 2, “The Blue Notebook,” and File 3, “Terminals.” For File 3, Malloy tried replacing the search-driven interface with a random one: “In the same way [information] comes and goes in the narrator’s mind,” she wrote, one of the hundred records of “Terminals” would appear unpredictably each time you requested a new one. “Sometimes one record will be repeated several times,” the instructions note, “or one part of the story will be submerged for a long time”—perhaps never to surface at all, for some readers.

Malloy published the completed Uncle Roger through the new Art Com Software, designed to give computer artists a route to distribution. The original edition came on three floppy disks, one for each File, in a transparent plastic box with labels and disk sleeves covered in hand-inked lettering. She devised the term “narrabase” for her project, and wrote a program of the same name to make it easier to author new ones. “Instead of baseball statistics or information on the migratory habits of fresh water fish,” she wrote, “narrabases contain fictional, narrative information.”8

Each file is a pool of information into which the reader plunges repeatedly, emerging with a cumulative and individual picture. Thus, the narrabase form uses a computer database as a way to build up levels of meaning and to show many aspects of the story and characters, rather than as a means of providing alternate plot turns and endings.7

Malloy wrote more narrabases, continuing to bring her artist’s instincts to new forms of writing and storytelling. A critic wrote that reading her work is like “stepping into a labyrinth in which you’re lost and finding things at the same time.”4 But her specific project would become eclipsed in literary circles by the more general phenomenon of hypertext fiction that would rise to prominence a few years later, built around a metaphor of clickable words rather than searchable archives. For years, Malloy would not get the credit she deserved for being one of the earliest pioneers of “electronic literature,” as the literary hypertext movement came to be called. Pieces by men writing later became more famous and better studied. It wasn’t until the 2010s that feminist scholars like Kathi Berens1 and Dene Grigar3 helped shine a stronger spotlight on Malloy’s crucial early achievements. 

Malloy never stopped writing, and she proved surprisingly prescient about the ways technology would change how people read. “In the 21st century,” she wrote in 1992, “readers will turn on and interact with literature that is displayed on affordable, book-sized computers.”8 Unwilling to wait for that future to arrive, she has created dozens of projects over the decades since that explore different interfaces to stories and new paradigms for reading them. In a 2012 interview, she leans forward with wide-eyed excitement, gesturing broadly as she talks about a work in progress:

	I’m working in musical notation … essentially I’m creating text that comes out on three or four different screens.… I’m scoring it. So you know, I have 4/4 time, I have to translate that into a slower time. So I’m writing scores! And I’m really excited about it … to me, this is amazing.3

Malloy’s work has continued to take inspiration from the classics as much as new technology. When asked to contribute to a book called The Future of Text, she sent in a chapter composed entirely of quotations from the past, including this one from Virginia Woolf that echoed her 2012 project: “I should like to write four lines at a time, describing the same feeling, as a musician does; because it always seems to me that things are going on at so many different levels simultaneously.”11 In 2020, when she was seventy-eight, her active website tracked an astonishing eight new projects she was involved in that year.

An interviewer once compared Uncle Roger to the nonlinear, stream-of-consciousness writing of James Joyce’s Ulysses. Malloy’s answer engaged less with comparisons of style than with the way both works were critical darlings but popular duds:

	People will say to me, “Well, this story wasn’t influential because nobody else did it.” You know, as a writer, is that your goal? Was that Hemingway’s goal? Was that Joyce’s goal? Was that Virginia Woolf’s goal? Who writes like Joyce now?3 

In the video, an infectious grin splits her face, and her eyes are sparkling like a trickster’s.


References

1) Berens, Kathi Inman. 2014. “Judy Malloy’s Seat at the (Database) Table: A Feminist Reception History of Early Hypertext Literature.” Literary and Linguistic Computing 29 (3).
2) Frost, Charlotte. 2019. “Digital Critics: The Early History of Online Art Criticism.” Leonardo 52 (1), 2019.
3) Grigar, Dene, and Stuart Moulthrop. 2015. “Pathfinders: Judy Malloy’s Uncle Roger.” Pathfinders. 2015. scalar.usc.edu/works/pathfinders/judy-malloy | a Feb 20, 2021
4) jrank.org. n.d. “Judy Malloy.” reference.jrank.org/biography-2/Malloy_Judy.html | a Feb 20, 2021
5) Malloy, Judy. 1987. “Information as an Artist’s Material.” Whole Earth Review 57, Winter 1987.
6) Malloy, Judy. 1988. “OK Research, OK Genetic Engineering, Bad Information: Information Art Describes Technology.” Leonardo 21 (4), 1988.
7) Malloy, Judy. 1991. “Uncle Roger, an Online Narrabase.” Leonardo 24 (2), 1991.
8) Malloy, Judy. 1992. “Electronic Storytelling in the 21st Century.” In Visions of the Future: Art, Technology, and Computing in the 21st Century, ed. Clifford A. Pickover. New York: St. Martin’s Press.
9) Malloy, Judy. 1993. “CFP’93 - Portrait of the Artist on the Net.” Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility. 1993. cpsr.org/prevsite/conferences/cfp93/malloy.html | a Feb 20, 2021
10) Malloy, Judy. 2014. “Digital Literature Pioneers: Judy Malloy on ‘narrabases.’” Interview by The Lit Platform. theliteraryplatform.com/news/2014/04/digital-literature-pioneers-judy-malloy-on-narrabases-80s-silicon-valley-and-e-literature-today | a Feb 20, 2021
11) Malloy, Judy. 2020. “The Words of the Creators.” In The Future of Text, ed. Frode Alexander Hegland. Future Text Publishing.
12) Malloy, Judy. n.d. “Home Page.” people.well.com/user/jmalloy/mybio.html#mylife | a Feb 20, 2021
13) Malloy, Judy. n.d. “Notes on Uncle Roger.” people.well.com/user/jmalloy/uncleroger/uncle.html | a Feb 18, 2021
14) Malloy, Judy. n.d. “Judy Malloy: The BASIC Uncle Roger - Beta Version_2.” www.narrabase.net/uncle_readme.html | a Oct 6, 2022
15) Nyhan, Julianne, and Andrew Flinn. 2016. “The Influence of Algorithmic Thinking: Judy Malloy and Julianne Nyhan.” In Computation and the Humanities: Towards an Oral History of Digital Humanities. Springer Series on Cultural Computing. Cham: Springer International Publishing. 
16) Rheingold, Howard. 1993. The Virtual Community: Homesteading on the Electronic Frontier. Addison-Wesley Longman.
