Monster Island

1989

Jack B. Everitt
Style: Play-by-Mail
Debuted: Dec 1989
Launch Platform: Pen and paper (client), DOS (server)
Publisher: Adventures By Mail
Language: QuickBasic 4.1
Launch Price: $4 (per mailed turn)

Opening Text:

	MONSTER ISLAND is a whole new type of Play-by-mail game. It is a strange game, unlike anything you’ve seen. Throw away any preconceived ideas you may have; MONSTER ISLAND has its own special feel and works in a very intelligent way. 


The mailbox squeaks open, and a teenager’s eyes light up. Amid the junk mail for parents is a bulky envelope from a company called Adventures By Mail. The teen has waited all week for it to get here.

Inside is a trifold newsletter and a long, stiff postcard, with a New York return address on one side and a blank grid marked with esoteric abbreviations on the other. But the bulk of the content is a stack of stapled, laser-printed pages. While everyone getting letters from Adventures By Mail this week received the same card and newsletter, the pages in each envelope are unique, printed for one person alone. These pages describe the fate of the character whose adventures this teenager has dictated for the past few months: a Monster named Doggar who is not a villain in this story, but one of its many, many heroes.

	MONSTER ISLAND

	MONSTER# 8489		DAY CYCLE# 8   
	ACCT# 12067			CREDITS = 6    
	TURN# 8	       	     WEEK# 11     

	This turn was processed on MAY 19 at 9:52 AM
	Your WEEK# 12 will be from MAY 29 to JUNE 9
	Your next turn may be run IMMEDIATELY (a make-up turn is due) 


	DOGGAR’S RESULTS

	’TWEEN

	It’s been 6 days since you made camp. You’re still alive on Monster Island. [+2 Toughness.] Resting ’Tween turns restores some of your Health. [+11 Health.] You spend 15 Action Pts repairing your Haversuit. What fun. You break camp. 

	RESULTS OF THIS TURN’S ORDERS

	F - 48            FRIENDLINESS/RISKINESS:  Change level
	Your Friendliness level is now at 4, guarded. Your Riskiness level is now at 8, somewhat risky. (0 Action Pts used, 135 left.) 

	T - 33            TRAVEL:  Move East, then East again
	CROSSING INTO NEXT SQUARE(6,31): Still more Jungle. 

	CROSSING INTO NEXT SQUARE(6,32): Still more Jungle. You chow down. (-1 Food.) (20 Action Pts used, 115 left.) 

	J - 15            JAZZERCIZE AEROBICS:  For 15 Action Pts
	You do stretching exercises until you can’t stand it anymore. The exercising pays off. [+11 Health, +1 Muscle.] (15 Action Pts used, 100 left.) 

	T - 45            TRAVEL: Move Southeast, then South
	CROSSING INTO NEXT SQUARE(5,33): The terrain continues to be Jungle. You take a break and chew down a tasty meal. (-1 Food.) 

	CROSSING INTO NEXT SQUARE(4,33): The terrain continues to be Jungle. Uh, oh! A strange smell alerts you to the presence of a Creature nearby. Silently, you squat until all is quiet again. Unfortunately, the Creature keeps coming toward you. It’s a Jungle Rattler. (See blurb.)
	Battle ensues… 
	** BATTLE: DOGGAR vs. a Jungle Rattler **  With sweaty palms, you fire one rock toward the Jungle Rattler and connect with it in its upper section. [1 Hit reduces its Health by 4.] Taking a deep breath, you become one with your weapon […] 

The teen skips ahead to the end of the stack of pages to read the new blurb describing the Jungle Rattler—a creature never previously encountered—then flips back to see the outcome of the battle (Doggar wins) and remaining actions. These include two more fights, a bout of weapons practice, an unsuccessful Quest for Knowledge, and more travel. Eventually, the action points run out and the turn ends:

	MAKE CAMP

	You select a campsite and check out the surrounding area. You hunt for a bit. No luck hunting. The rigors of this week’s travels have been of benefit to you. [+1 Toughness.] It’s been too long since you last had some water. This lack of water is making you weaker. [-2 Health.] […]You’re no longer able to keep your eyes open. You fall asleep. 

	From the square you washed ashore, you’ve travelled 34 squares East and 2 squares North. 

The next pages shows a map of Doggar’s journey this turn: a grid ten squares wide filled with a black-and-white pattern that might almost represent a jungle if you squint, overlaid with clip-art symbols for creatures found and objects discovered. Pages of statistics follow, tracking (among many other things) that Doggar has found 40 Knowledge Blurbs, has 71 Toughness and 42 Muscle, is carrying 3 Small Round Rocks and 1 Large Clam Shell, is very thirsty, and has 152 Action Points available for Turn #9. 

It will be a few days before the teenager’s next move. Some thinking is needed to plan next steps before penciling in a new set of orders on the card. This week’s blurbs must be cross-referenced with others previously received and carefully cataloged in a basement filing cabinet. There is more to do, too: writing a letter at the kitchen table to a would-be group leader, explaining that Doggar is now waiting in the square they agreed on and hoping the leader can get there in time to perform the promised initiation ceremony; responding to a letter from a Monster met on a previous turn who had written a polite cursive note asking for any information on Maladors or Ghoul Buzzards. Eventually the small stack of correspondence is stamped and returned to the curbside mailbox. It will be at least a week until the next turn results come back.

Believe it or not, the teenager is playing a computer game.

The genre of play-by-mail (PBM) games originated with postal chess, where opponents would mail moves back and forth over months of play. By the 1960s a tradition of PBM wargames had started, spurred largely by the 1959 release of the board game Diplomacy [Allan B. Calhamer]. Requiring exactly seven dedicated players, and released at a time when board games were still frowned upon as a hobby for adults, the game was a natural fit for the asynchronous, private, and distributed mode of play offered by PBM, where players could think about each turn for as long as they liked and weren’t limited to their local area when searching for opponents. In a growing network of fanzines, Diplomacy fans listed their addresses and advertised upcoming games they wanted to run or their availability for games run by others.

Diplomacy is a game with a focus on negotiation and social strategy, and here, too, the slower pace of play-by-mail could be an advantage. Some postal games spaced out their turns across months of real-world time, so players could mail a flurry of diplomatic missives, threats, promises, and negotiations before any actual moves needed to be decided. But stripped of social interaction, Diplomacy is mechanically fairly simple. Inevitably, some PBM fans began to invent their own original games with more complex rules. (Two such fans, incidentally, were Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson, whose custom PBM wargames would evolve into Dungeons & Dragons and inspire the dawn of tabletop roleplaying—but that’s another story.)

In 1970, a young wargamer named Rick Loomis, who was serving out his Vietnam draft at a fort in Hawaii, had moved beyond playing PBM games to making his own:

	I had invented a multi-player game called Nuclear Destruction which was a little different from Diplomacy in that it had hidden movement. Thus, the moderator had to send different information to each player.… All this gaming kept my mailbox full of letters, which was the primary purpose back then. But soon I had over 200 players in my game, and it was becoming difficult to keep up. So I asked my friend Steve MacGregor to write a computer program for me which would run the Nuclear Destruction game. We rented time on a Control Data computer which was near the Fort.8

Loomis’s computer-assisted PBM game became wildly popular. The computer allowed the level of detail, complexity, size, and scope of a play-by-mail game to grow far beyond what a human moderator could keep up with. When he got out of the army, Loomis started the first commercial PBM company, Flying Buffalo, and paid $14,000 for a Raytheon 704 computer that processed turns using paper tape. Years later he’d joke that he might have been the first person in the world to buy a computer specifically to play games with. Outside of specialized applications like military wargame simulations, he may well have been.

Dozens of other commercial PBM companies sprung up, charging players a fee of anywhere from two to twelve dollars to process a turn in increasingly elaborate games. While some games remained human moderated, the most complex required a computer to keep up with states that might involve thousands of units, each of which might respond to hundreds of possible orders. Some game manuals became inches thick. Each turn, players would submit an order card that laid out everything they wanted their units to do, generally with alphanumeric codes that could easily be input into the computer. For instance, 47-M-33 might mean to (M)ove unit (47) east (3) and then east (3) again. Optical character recognition technology was still emerging, so an employee would generally type in the orders on each player’s card by hand, a tedious job repeated with each new day’s stack of mail. In some games, order results might run to dozens of pages that contained the outcome of multiple actions as well as statistics, information learned, and communications received or intercepted.

Mainframe-powered PBM games of the late 70s and early 80s were far more sophisticated than anything available on personal computers at the time, even for the few players who owned one. One fan would later reminisce about the unique experience of playing: “Board games can’t quite match it, because they’re over in one night and you don’t really have a chance to connive with fellow gamers much. Computer games can’t come close unless they are multi-player, but ultimately fall short for the same reason—they are completed quickly and the pace allows for nothing other than action and grind.”5 PBM games, by contrast, could last hundreds of turns spread out over years of real-world time, and they allowed for strategies so complex it could take days to plot them out and set them up.

By the end of the 80s, hundreds of unique play-by-mail games had come and gone, and a new generation of designers had grown up on them. PBM fans Jack B. Everitt, Bob Cook, and Mike Popolizio had founded Adventures By Mail in 1981, hoping to stand out in a crowded marketplace by focusing on reliability and quality. They were longtime fans of George Schubel’s popular human-moderated PBM game The Tribes of Crane [1976], so their first title was a space-themed variant called Beyond the Stellar Empire [1982]. Their first breakout hit was It’s a Crime [1985], in which each player controlled a competing gang fighting for turf in a fictional city. The game was cleverly designed to start off simple, with only twelve possible orders, but to open up in complexity as players rose to higher ranks of power and learned new orders to direct minions, create contracts, join or fight the mafia, and mastermind various business ventures. Advertising at cons and in magazines aimed at roleplaying, sci-fi, and miniatures fans, Adventures By Mail hoped to expand the core audience of PBM beyond its base of hardcore wargamers. 

Everitt, though, had even more ambitious dreams. While still in the midst of launching It’s a Crime, he had already started planning a “monster of a game—with a whole continent to explore and lots of things to find and make and do. It would have adventure and mystery, and it would never end.”2 A competitor had recently touted the fact that their system could support a game with five hundred players at once. Everitt wanted to make a game that could handle fifteen thousand. Most PBM turn reports were printed on smudgy dot matrix printers, making them dreary walls of text, but laser printers were becoming increasingly affordable. Everitt had visions of sending players clean reports with crisp text, multiple fonts, and graphical maps. He began coding even though he knew his company could not yet afford the hardware and storage to handle his dream game, trusting the tech he needed would keep dropping in price.

It did. After four years of intermittent work, the new game was ready to launch, running on a then-expensive 386 computer and hooked up to a 150 MB Bernoulli Box storage system. The game needed this space: its terrain contained over a quarter of a million locations, each with up to 120 associated variables, and there were a whopping 2,100 variables allocated for each player character. In December 1989 the first Monster Island turns were processed, and after a six-month beta with a few hundred players, Adventures By Mail added more laser printers and began to promote the game in earnest.

In the game you control not an army or a fleet of battleships, but a single survivor washed up on the shore of a strange land. You are a Monster, a strong and sturdy (yet ugly and unrefined) explorer of a massive unpeopled island—really more of a continent, described in the manual as “three times the size of Australia.”2 Rather than issuing single-turn orders to large groups of units, in Monster Island you would write a sequential task list for a single character: your own Monster. While combat was still present, it was a relatively minor part of each turn and largely outside the player’s control, resolved via randomness and statistics. The game’s focus, instead, was discovery. By pushing forward into uncharted squares, Monsters could find ruins with buried treasure, learn to craft useful items, trade stories and goods at outposts, build forts, and slowly increase their knowledge about the huge land in which they wandered. And unlike most PBM games, which featured a set number of players in a simulation that reset at the end of each run (like a board game), Monster Island was a single, persistent world. Each new player washed up somewhere on its western shore, with tougher challenges and bigger treasures to be found the farther east they traveled.

Like It’s a Crime, Everitt’s new game made the clever decision to initially hide most of its complexity. Rather than starting off with an enormous rulebook, new players received only a slim pamphlet that laid out in fewer than twenty half-size pages the game’s premise, instructions, and a starting set of nineteen orders. In fact, there were more than seventy possible orders in the game, most of which had to be discovered through play. Reach a trading outpost and you’d learn orders for buying and selling goods; stumble across another player and you’d learn commands for being friendly or hostile. You might even unlock the ability to request and send in entirely different kinds of order cards.

One such custom order card was for group management. It’s a Crime had benefited from extensive communication between players, who planned elaborate alliances and betrayals through letters and phone calls. Similarly, in Monster Island players could opt in to sharing their contact info with other Monsters they crossed paths with in their adventures. Players starting the game at the same time were often placed in clusters near each other, and the starter manual explained that a group of eight Monsters could meet in a grid square and perform a ritual that would link them as a Group. Everitt added this mechanic to the early game to encourage player collaboration from the beginning.

This deliberate design of hidden mechanics but easy communication led to cooperative play, as players needed to correspond and share info to figure out how the game they were playing even worked: its boundaries of geography and possibility, and the capabilities of its complex, hidden engine. Initially in the official newsletter, then in a smattering of fanzines, players asked each other for help and began to share hard-won info:

	Has anyone resurrected (or have information [about]) a ghost?

	A monster has heard of demi-gods of Vampires (from ancient silver spike blurb), Gargoyles (from iron spike blurb) and Spiders (from ???). Are there any others? Has anyone found a way to worship or follow one of these gods???

	So far I have only noted the following benefits from having a mount. First they will steer you around quicksand. Second a Demon Condor tried to carry me away but my legs had a firm hold on my plodder (mount) and the Demon Condor failed.

	Supposedly a Purpumpkin and four Stemtoad glands will allow you to make a lantern. This one definitely belongs in the unconfirmed rumor section.

In a time before personal websites—and long before wikis—there was no central storehouse of information about the game or easy way to create one. Adventures By Mail officially frowned on fanzines revealing secrets directly or reprinting the blurbs found in order results, which detailed new commands or elusive secrets. But within a year of the game’s release, players had begun to self-organize in fanzines like Blood Moon Tribune to create peer-to-peer information sharing networks, and via in-game groups whose primary purpose was to learn and explore:

	David Gloss would like to create an “information clearing house” for Monster Island. If you’re feeling frustrated, and don’t want to wait to learn something during the normal course of the game, send your questions and an S.A.S.E. to [address omitted]. Also send him any interesting information you have, so he can pass it on to other players.

	Jae Kim is undertaking an ambitious task—mapping the entire Island! Send your map data to him at the address below. You can also send Jae an SASE, requesting information on your area; if he can figure out where you are, he’ll send you back whatever information he has, in as much or as little detail as you want.

But the game’s ambitions were perhaps too vast. Players had trouble finding each other in all the island’s immense spaces. Coordinating across turns could be difficult as well, due to a design decision meant to increase the speed of play: turns weren’t synced to a fixed clock, but advanced for each player whenever their order card was processed. Many fanzine personals show signs of frustration:

	PRAALUU: What is your new address? Contact your group leader.
	
	THE BLACK DEATH! Where are you guys? I joined your group and I haven’t met any members in the last 25 turns. Please contact: Bambi the Viper.
	
	It has become sickening that every monster that we have tried to write to neglects to write back after sending very few letters. It distresses us that we take the time to form communications between monsters only to not get a response. If you dumb, stupid, idiotic monsters think that you can get away with this, you have another thing coming. Bounties on the following monsters are set at 50 oculars… 
	
	SLIPPERY JEEM - Where are you? I looked and looked and looked and couldn’t find you! Please Yell or make some inscriptions or carve a tree or something! - NAKEMIN T’HED

Years after launch, players had still not uncovered major portions of the game. In late 1992, official publication the Monster Island Journal revealed that only “50 Monsters have successfully performed the Disciple Rite and can now cast spells. They have access to over 40 different spells, although no Monster has learned more than 15 spells.” In 1996, nearly seven years after the game’s debut, an online post announced that a Monster named Skizlum Skallaglamm had become “the first American monster to cross the Crystal Hills barrier,” a range of seemingly impassable mountains hundreds of squares east of the game’s starting zone, but by no means marking its furthest boundaries. 

As fandoms began to move online, Monster Island players gathered on CompuServe’s PBMGAMES forum, GEnie, America Online, and Usenet, where the rec.games.pbm newsgroup appeared in 1991. Online communities accelerated the pace of communication and information sharing, but perversely were also sounding the death knell for PBM. Why would anyone pay money to play games via paper mail when email was free? But that doom was still a few years off. The short-term problem was that while players were increasingly online, they were still spread across a myriad of services and standalone communities rather than a unified web, and were years away from the collaborative editing technologies that would simplify information collating for later complex games like Dwarf Fortress or Minecraft [Mojang Studios 2011].

Monster Island survived nonetheless, and for a surprisingly long time. The reference to American monsters in the earlier quote was due to the game’s popularity in Europe, where UK-based KJC Games had been managing an iteration that surpassed the US game in popularity. A German version run by a company called Daydream Productions launched in 1993. While Monster Island never became the breakaway hit Everitt had hoped for, the US game had over 1,600 active players by October 1992, making it financially sustainable in a field littered with the corpses of games that never made it past their first handful of turns. “It sounds so easy,” wrote Flying Buffalo’s Loomis back in 1983:

	Get a personal computer, write a program to run your game, put an ad in a few magazines, then sit back and let your computer do all the work while you bank a few extra bucks each week. Unfortunately there are so many problems that are not initially apparent: program bugs, equipment breakdowns, answering rules questions, answering complaints, opening letters, entering moves into the computer, correcting mistakes, moves that arrive late, moves that have unreadable game numbers or return addresses, keeping track of how much money everyone owes, deciding what to do about someone who hasn’t paid the money he owes but is still sending in game turns, handling bounced checks, and on and on. It is easy for a newcomer to get swamped.

Adventures By Mail overcame these hurdles and survived for over a decade in a brutal industry with minuscule profit margins and customers who were hard to attract and retain. But there were signs by 1993 that Everitt’s interest in Monster Island, and in PBM more generally, was waning. While the fanzines kept coming, no more official newsletters were published after 1992, and a promised fourth edition of the rulebook never materialized. Improvements to the game slowed as Everitt realized the cutting-edge framework he’d started developing in the 80s had now locked him into its legacy limitations: “I’m pretty much out of free variables for Monster stats,” he lamented in August 1993.3 The thought of porting five years of QuickBasic code to a new framework no doubt seemed immensely unattractive. 

But the turning point came that summer at Gen Con, the tabletop gaming convention Everitt religiously attended each year to do outreach and promotion. That year was the Gen Con of Magic: The Gathering, which hit the industry like a tidal wave: released on August 5, 1993, the collectible card game was all anyone was talking about when the con opened two weeks later. Upstart company Wizards of the Coast sold all the Magic cards they’d brought to the convention within two days, and by October had sold out their entire first printing of ten million cards. Magic became a cultural phenomenon in a way PBM and even roleplaying games writ large never had. Wizards of the Coast grew so quickly they were able to acquire TSR, the makers of Dungeons & Dragons, less than four years later.

Everitt saw huge potential in the new style of game. Upon his return from Gen Con, he started a new venture, Adventures Distributing, to sell Magic cards by mail, having negotiated a bulk rate from Wizards. Eventually Adventures By Mail turned over further development of Monster Island to KJC in the UK; by 1998 all the original founders had left. Play-by-Mail was on its way out anyway, as internet multiplayer gaming swallowed more and more of its player base. The company shut down for good in 2004, having lost most of its players to newer, shinier games.

But Monster Island, like its preternaturally tough residents, refused to die. The game’s European version had amassed a large enough following to form strong ties among player groups, some of which had survived for a decade or longer, still invested in the exploits of their Monsters. By 1999, KJC had “processed in excess of a million game turns with tens of thousands [of] active and satisfied customers.”6 Introducing the ability for players to submit turns via email—and later to receive turn reports that way too—lowered operational costs and provided an easier entry point for new players discovering the game through the internet. In 2005 a fan-run operation called Adventurer Guild purchased the servers and rights to run Monster Island in the US, and it kept that version running for three more years, processing over five thousand turns for a trickle of dedicated players. Across the pond, KJC kept the game alive until at least 2017—a run of nearly thirty years for a game its creator had hoped would last for three.

PBM survives today, though mostly in the form of PBEM (play-by-email). The name of a modern fanzine, Suspense & Decision, neatly sums up the genre’s appeal, captured also by a retrospective on the blog Greyhawk Grognard:

	What these sorts of games bring that few others do is time. Time to savor the situation, drink it in, plot and plan. Time to have multiple conversations with folks before you need to get your orders in, and then of course the delicious wait while you scowl at the mailbox wondering why that damned game master hasn’t sent your turn back. You could get that with a PBEM game, but there is also something very visceral about getting that envelope in your hands and pouring over the results in hard-copy. It’s a very different experience than the instant gratification in modern computer games. It’s also different than a face-to-face game, as the negotiations can get really, really involved and of course the number of potential players is vastly greater.1

Though gaming culture has mostly forgotten it, PBM represents one of the oldest threads of digital games. The very first textual computer games ran on mainframes without monitors or interactive terminals. Play happened by reading printouts and inputting commands via filling out a form or punching a card. Inputs were processed in batch jobs that might not start for days and might take hours to compute. Early games like The Carnegie Tech Management Game had core loops much like the few PBM games that survive today, with centralized servers processing bulk orders on daily or weekly schedules—a legacy of digital gaming that stretches back two-thirds of a century. Most of those mainframe games are impossible to play today, just as most of their PBM descendants have also been lost. Though few lived in the right time and place to play each in their prime, the legacy of these games with different rhythms would be monstrous to forget. 


References

1) Bloch, Joseph. 2009. “Play-By-Mail Games.” Greyhawk Grognard (blog). Feb 27, 2009. www.greyhawkgrognard.com/2009/01/27/play-by-mail-games | a Apr 7, 2020
2) Everitt, Jack B. 1991. Monster Island Travel Guide & Rules. Third edition. Adventures By Mail.
3) Everitt, Jack. 1993. “Monster Island Journal Issue 4.5.” In Blood Moon Tribune #7, Aug 1993.
4) Graves, Terry Joe. 2011. “Victory.” PlayByMail.Net Forum. Mar 16, 2011. playbymail.net/mybb/showthread.php?tid=83 | a Apr 7, 2020
5) ixnay. 2011. “PBM Is Dead! Long Live PBM!” PlayByMail.Net Forum. Jan 7, 2011. playbymail.net/mybb/showthread.php?tid=5&pid=10 | a Apr 7, 2020
6) KJC Games. n.d. Official website. www.kjcgames.com | s Feb 8, 1999
7) Lindahl, Greg. n.d. “Play by Email (PBeM) & Play by Mail (PBM) List Index.” www.pbm.com/~lindahl/pbm_list | a Apr 7, 2020
8) Loomis, Rick. 1983. “The History of Play-by-Mail and Flying Buffalo.” Flying Buffalo Quarterly #48, Jun 1983. playbymail.net/mybb/showthread.php?tid=78 | a Apr 2, 2020
9) Peterson, Jon. 2012. Playing at the World: A History of Simulating Wars, People and Fantastic Adventures, from Chess to Role-Playing Games. San Diego: Unreason Press.
10) “Play by Mail Games Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ).” n.d. rec.games.pbm. www.pbm.com/~lindahl/rgp.faq.html#Q1 | a Apr 7, 2020
11) “The Adventure Guild.” 2004. Dec 3, 2004. www.adventureguild.net | a Apr 7, 2020
12) Webb, Ed J. n.d. “Ed’s Monster Island Site.” monster.edwebb.net | a Apr 7, 2020
