The 1990s


There’s a misconception that the 90s were a fallow time for text games, caught between the commercial death of interactive fiction and its rebirth at the hands of amateurs. In truth, it was a time of radical experimentation and profound change that saw the emergence of many new forms and the reshuffling of structures that a few years before had seemed indomitable. After a heady youth, text games faced their first major setback: to survive, they were forced to grow.

While online text games had been present since the beginning (see 1975 and 1980), at first only a tiny percentage of computer users had the means (and the modem) to connect. In the 90s the internet finally broke through to the general public, at first through a growing wave of dial-up services like GEnie, Prodigy, CompuServe, and America Online. These services offered user-friendly front-ends to the complex array of preweb technologies like Gopher, FTP, Fido, Archie, and Usenet, as well as forums and discussion groups where like-minded fans could gather. The rise of these services, coinciding with the fall of commercial text adventures, led to many online communities of fans still playing and, increasingly, making them. On the CompuServe Gamer’s Forum, fans using AGT (the Adventure Game Toolkit) organized collaborations and competitions for amateur games; on another forum dedicated to play-by-mail, enthusiasts swapped fanzines, tips, and reviews. On Usenet, newsgroups like alt.hypertext, rec.games.mud, and rec.arts.int-fiction became asynchronous gathering places for those interested in interactive stories—an odd mixture of academics, computer professionals, curious authors, and diehard fans. While communities in previous decades were linked by paper newsletters or in-person meetups, online meeting spaces greatly accelerated the speed of conversations and provided easy access to archives and an audience. You could post a new game online and someone could be playing and reviewing it the next day.

Most amateur games were idle experiments, but some were surprisingly elaborate. A group of seven authors on the Gamer’s Forum, led by Judith Pintar, collaborated to produce Shades of Gray [1992], a formally and narratively ambitious saga of linked presents and pasts involving, among other things, the history of Haiti. Perdition’s Flames [Michael J. Roberts 1993] featured a sprawling collection of puzzles in a hellaciously modernized afterlife, with 666 possible points. Meanwhile, a group of academics were attempting to reinvent text adventures as a platform for the future of artificial intelligence, and a distributed group of fans were reverse engineering Infocom’s story format and compiler with the hope of one day writing new games for it. There was no obvious next direction for text games, freeing fans to explore any direction they chose.

The newsgroups rec.arts.int-fiction and rec.games.int-fiction became particularly influential online communities. A nexus of parser game fans would help bootstrap a rebirth of the form that would push it far beyond what most commercial publishers had envisioned or attempted. Long discussions coalesced into dense articles on IF design and theory, like Graham Nelson’s “The Craft of Adventure” (1995) and Roger Giner-Sorolla’s “Crimes Against Mimesis” (1996). Nelson’s programming language Inform, the most significant end product of the collective Infocom research, let authors easily create new games that ran in the defunct studio’s cross-platform engine. Along with Mike Roberts’ TADS (Text Adventure Development System), Inform led to an explosion of new games, some rivaling or exceeding the complexity of the old commercial titles. Fans on CompuServe had sporadically run a competition for new games written in AGT between 1986 and 1994, but the newsgroups took on the mantle in 1995 by starting an annual Interactive Fiction Competition still running as of this writing, after twenty-seven years. Its two-hour time limit for judging is credited with shifting the kinds of text games people were writing away from traditional full-length games, which could take amateurs years to write, toward smaller and shorter titles, which in turn encouraged experimentation and increased the speed of iteration on ideas, techniques, and styles.

Elsewhere on the early net, bulletin board systems (BBSes) and multi-user dungeons (MUDs) both reached peak popularity in the first half of the 90s. MUDs had grown from Trubshaw and Bartle’s original into a thriving genre, with hundreds running worldwide by the early 90s. Much like their later graphical descendants, massively multiplayer online roleplaying games (MMORPGs), MUDs provided not only escapist entertainment but communities where friendships and uniquely online cultures were forged. Some MUDs ran for decades: GemStone [Simutronics 1988], Federation II [Interactive Broadcasting 1988], and Genesis [Lars Pensjö 1989] are all still running as of this writing. Others grew away from their hack-and-slash origins into exclusively social or creative places, evolving into almost unrecognizably different forms.

MUDs generally needed to run on a network that a dozen or more users could connect to simultaneously. The BBS ecosystem was different. While there were exceptions, most bulletin boards had only a single phone line, meaning the games designed for them focused on asynchronous rather than simultaneous play—like elaborate board games, with only one player taking a turn at a time. Games like Legend of the Red Dragon [Seth Robinson 1989], Food Fight [Rigor Mortis 1987; Michael Wilson 1992], and Trade Wars 2002 were filled with colorful ASCII text and ANSI graphics, and often served as narratively-charged second places where members of a board’s community could play out friendships and rivalries, running in thousands of unique instances with exclusively local players. 

The possibilities of interactive prose were also being explored by communities of writers. Experiments in linking bits of story together via indexed keywords or arbitrary linkages, rather than in linear sequence, had been happening for decades (see 1986), but by the 90s there was ready-made software for writing such narratives. Apple’s Hypercard [1987], included for free on all Macs sold until the early 90s, provided a user-friendly graphical interface for constructing nonlinear sequences of text or images; while Eastgate’s Storyspace and the first hypertext novel written within it, afternoon, a story [Michael Joyce], both went on sale in 1990. These tools gave rise to a small but energized movement of writers investigating the literary possibilities of nonlinear prose, often under the name “electronic literature.” Works like Victory Garden [Stuart Moulthrop 1991], Marble Springs [Deena Larsen 1993], and Uncle Buddy’s Phantom Funhouse [John McDaid 1992] explored the creative possibilities of hyperlinked text, often without the underlying simulation or gamelike qualities that characterized parser-based interactive fiction.

Hypertext would in fact prove to be an undeniable pivot of the 1990s, not just for text games or even games generally, but for society at large. The World Wide Web and its hypertext markup language and transfer protocol (HTML and HTTP) would become the internet for most users within a short span of years, replacing the patchwork quilt of tools and services that had come before and bringing in vastly more users. Journalist Julian Dibbell captured the shock of this transition in his book on 90s MUD culture My Tiny Life, writing how early netizens were at first skeptical of the web, which was a new and, at the time, still relatively unknown virtual space—a global library full of brightly illustrated “pages” of information, each one linked to another in a free-form mesh that appeared, potentially at least, to spread forever in every direction.… In the early months of 1995, the Web burst into popular consciousness in a flurry of magazine covers, initial stock offerings, and cocktail-party conversations, and as its fame and fortune grew it swiftly remade the Internet in its own vivid image. The Net that MUDs had flourished in—a place of unadorned text and self-contained sites spread out among the universities and research centers of the world—gave way to a place of swirling color, sound, and commerce, a free-flowing sea of information that was growing so vast so quickly that the great engines of media hype could barely keep ahead of it in their rush to exaggerate its importance.

The web had first been announced on the alt.hypertext newsgroup in 1991, where a few years later the first graphical web browser Mosaic would also debut. In both cases, the venue was presumably picked “because its community was recognized as the most likely to understand and appreciate the importance and potential” of the web. In the wake of the sea change, new waves of experiments followed. Early novels and serials for the web like Delirium [Douglas Cooper 1994], The Spot [Scott Zakarin 1995–7], and Sunshine 69 [Bobby Rabyd 1996] targeted a wide range of audiences from soap opera fans to narrative postmodernists, exploring many ways hyperlinked text and media might tell a story. Client-side languages like JavaScript and server-side frameworks like Perl and PHP opened up the possibility of creating games for the web, though these would not really begin to compete until the next decade. Most early web narratives were more prose than system.

As commercial computer games across the decade boasted increasingly impressive sound and graphics—with the rise of video cards, CD-ROM, 3D graphics, and full-motion video clips—text games went underground. But their makers were more keen than ever to try new experiments and discover what place, if any, their playful text might have in the coming twenty-first century.


More Text Games from the 1990s

1990
afternoon, a story (Michael Joyce, Eastgate). Influential hypertext novel explores fragmented memories triggered by witnessing an auto accident. The Axe of Kolt (Larry Horsfield, FSF Adventures). Amateur fantasy adventure for the ZX Spectrum. BatMUD (Antti Luostarinen and Niklas Lindroos, LPMud). Early game running the LPMud software, based in Finland; complex, massive, and still running as of 2022. La Diosa de Cozumel (Andrés Samudio Monro et al., Aventuras AD). First of influential Spanish “Ci-U-Than” trilogy about Mayan temples and mythology. Ditch Day Drifter (Michael J. Roberts, TADS). The original TADS example game simulates campus shenanigans at Caltech. Dragon’s Gate (Adventures Unlimited, GEnie). Commercial MUD with a roleplaying emphasis; ran on various services through 2007. Spellcasting 101: Sorcerers Get All the Girls (Steve Meretzky, Legend Entertainment). First game from company staffed by several Infocom vets; hybrid graphics/text interface with mildly ribald college hijinks. Unnkulian Underworld (D.A. Leary, TADS). Traditional Zork-like; first of a shareware trilogy. Wonderland (David Bishop et al., Magnetic Scrolls). Final text game from the British company; well-remembered take on the Alice story. 

1991
Cosmoserve (Judith Pintar, AGT). Lovingly simulated parody of BBS culture. DikuMUD (Sebastian Hammer et al., DikuMUD). Combat-centric MUD whose open-source engine became a much-used platform and inspired first-generation MMOs like EverQuest. Humbug (Graham Cluley, DOS). Surreal holiday puzzle adventure set in and around a multiversal manor house; unusually, written in straight code, not an IF dev language. The Multi-Dimensional Thief (Joel Finch, AGT). World-hopping treasure hunt; winner of the CompuServe Softworks AGT Competition. Save Princeton (Jacob Weinstein and Karine Schaefer, TADS). Another collegial puzzle game with the requisite campus-specific in-jokes. TimeQuest (Bob Bates, Legend Entertainment). Stop a villain from destroying history in this adventure by a former Infocomer. T-Zero (Dennis Cunningham, DOS). Another time-travel adventure, this one from an amateur, set in a series of surreal landscapes; quality writing and puzzles. Victory Garden (Stuart Moulthrop, Eastgate Systems). Hypertext novel set during and reacting to the Gulf War.

1992
Agrippa: A Book of the Dead (William Gibson, Kevin Begos Jr. Publishing). Artist’s book and floppy disk with a 300-line poem that permanently encrypted itself after reading. Discworld MUD (David Bennett, LPMud). Based on Pratchett’s fantasy world, grew to immense size and complexity; still running in 2020. Empire (Farhaj Hashmi, DikuMUD-derived). MUD noted for PVP combat and a roleplay-focused system where names and stats of other characters were not shown unless your character had reason to know them; ran through 2010. Gateway (Mike Verdu et al., Legend Entertainment). Adaptation of Pohl sci-fi classic with well-regarded puzzles. The Mines of Lithiad (Jack Lockerby, Zenobi Software). Rescue an egg for a dragon in this PAW game by a prolific amateur author. Shades of Gray (Judith Pintar et al., AGT). Multi-author work with complex storyline involving politics and tarot. Uncle Buddy’s Phantom Funhouse (John McDaid, Eastgate Systems). Story told as a collection of HyperCard stacks cataloging the ephemera of a quirky relative’s life.

1993
The Abbey (Art LaFrana, DOS). Shareware game in a custom development system; creepy, strongly plotted mystery in a medieval abbey. Eric the Unready (Bob Bates, Legend Entertainment). Fantasy comedy about an inept knight with hybrid text/graphics interface. Gateway 2: Homeworld (Mike Verdu and Glen Dahlgren, Legend Entertainment). One of the last commercially released text adventures of the period. The Horror of Rylvania (D.A. Leary, TADS). Shareware vampire puzzle game with quality writing. Marble Springs (Deena Larsen, Eastgate Systems). HyperCard-driven anthology telling stories of women in a nineteenth-century American town. MediaMOO (Amy Bruckman, MOO). Online space for academics and researchers, created at MIT Media Lab. Perdition’s Flames (Michael J. Roberts, TADS). Epic puzzle game set in a bureaucratic hell, by designer of TADS language. The Sound of One Hand Clapping (Erica Sadun, AdvSys). Atmospheric puzzle game in a Buddhist-inspired world. 

1994
Balances (Graham Nelson, Inform). Demonstration of Inform’s advanced features, with intriguing spellcasting puzzles inspired by Infocom’s Enchanter series. Delirium (Douglas Anthony Cooper, web). Early novel serialized on the web with four interconnected pathways, later published in altered form as a print book. Enhanced (Hans Persson and Dominik Zemmler, TADS). Short, shareware, cyberpunk. The Legend Lives! (David Baggett, TADS). Set in far future of the Unnkulia universe where you battle a sentient computer virus; focus on story over puzzles. LegendMUD (Sherry Menton and Rick Delashmit, DikuMUD). MUD with areas based on well-researched historical periods; future MMO designer Raph Koster was an immortal. Legends of Terris (Paul Barnett, Online Games Company). UK-based MUD licensed to AOL Europe; most popular game on the service through the late 90s. Realms of Despair (Derek Snider, SMAUG). Popular MUD with evolved Diku codebase. The Two Towers (Aule et al., LPMud). Long-lived Tolkien MUD.

1995
A Change in the Weather (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 5). Time-constrained puzzles in a landscape changing as a storm rolls in; first Inform game by Plotkin and joint winner of the first IF Comp. A.L.I.C.E. (Richard Wallace, SETL). Prize-winning chatbot with thousands of hand-authored conversational gambits; origin of AIML format for bot content authoring. Christminster (Gareth Rees, Inform 5). Big college-set puzzle game with mysteries, NPCs, and an advancing story. The Eternal Adventure (Bill Piel and Josh Solan, EK Corporation). BBS storytelling game that let players add new choices and branches to an ever-growing digital gamebook. Hegirascope (Stuart Moulthrop, web). Postmodern hypertext novel with heavily interlinked passages that rapidly refresh, often before they can be completely read. Jigsaw (Graham Nelson, Inform 5). Ambitious follow-up to Curses; time-travel romance inspired in part by Infocom’s Trinity and glorying in the fiddly objects and setpieces Inform enabled. John’s Fire Witch (John Baker, TADS). Short game of elemental magic and well-clued puzzles; helped revive the idea of a competition for shorter games. The Spot (Scott Zakarin, web). One of the first popular episodic “soaps” for the web with daily diary entries from a cast of fictional Santa Monicans; ran through 1997. Theatre (Brendon Wyber, Inform 5). Well-crafted horror in an abandoned playhouse with a dark history. Uncle Zebulon’s Will (Magnus Olsson, TADS). Your oddball uncle turns out to be a wizard, clever magic-based puzzles ensue; joint winner of the first IF Comp. Undo (Neil deMause, TADS). Minimalist unwinnable game with IF metajokes that spurred discussions about the essence of the form.   

1996
Aardwolf (Lasher, originally Diku/OLC). Long-running MUD with major player versus player elements and hundreds of custom quests; still popular in 2022. Delusions (C.E. Forman, Inform 6). Rollercoaster of a game set in virtual reality. DragonRealms (Simutronics, Interactive Fiction Engine). Commercial MUD reachable from various early dial-up services like AOL. Fear (Chuan-Tze Teo, Inform 5). Three puzzle-based vignettes explore fears through the eyes of a phobia-laden character. In the End (Joe Mason, Inform 5). Meditation on the meaning of life in a near-future world; early experiment in puzzleless design that also eschewed compass navigation, inventory, and save/restore. Kissing the Buddha’s Feet (Leon Lin, TADS). Help your college roommate study by eliminating distractions; clever puzzles and memorable characters. Lost New York (Neil deMause, TADS). Well-researched time travel adventure exploring the history of the Big Apple. The Meteor, the Stone and a Long Glass of Sherbet (Graham Nelson, Inform 6). Zork homage; winner of 2nd IF Comp. My Boyfriend Came Back From the War (Olia Lialina, web). Web-based hypertext with nested frames and multimedia, telling a nonlinear story about an interrupted relationship. Pick Up the Phone Booth and Die (Rob Noyes, Inform 5). Controversial joke game that became a minimalist touchstone; inspired nearly a dozen parodies and imitators. Small World (Andrew D. Pontious, TADS). Repair a miniature solar system in this fun, well-regarded puzzler. Sunshine 69 (Bobby Rabyd, web). Early novel written for the web with scenes accessible in different orders; explores the dark sides of San Francisco’s Summer of Love. Tapestry (Daniel Ravipinto, Inform 5). After death, an angelic being offers you the chance to revisit three key moments in your life and decide if you want to change them. TorilMUD (Kris Kortright, Sequent). Set in D&D’s Forgotten Realms, a descendant of earlier MUD Sojourn; player Brad McQuaid would go on to create EverQuest.

1997
Babel (Ian Finley, TADS). Creepy game at a polar research station with extensive story and memorable writing. A Bear’s Night Out (David Dyte, Inform 6). Play a teddy bear getting up to mischief. The Edifice (Lucian Smith, Inform 6). IF Comp winner echoing 2001: A Space Odyssey; solve puzzles involving an alien structure helping you evolve. Glowgrass (Nate Cull, TADS). Explore a strange planet as a xenohistorian from a far future. Jabberwacky (Rollo Carpenter, web). Chatbot that learned interactions from prior humans who had talked with it; 2008 descendant Cleverbot had more than 150 million conversations. The Lost Spellmaker (Neil James Brown, Inform 6). Spellcasting mystery; early example of a lesbian protagonist in a game. Mercy (Chris Klimas, Inform 6). Early puzzleless game set at a hospital in the midst of a deadly epidemic. She’s Got a Thing for a Spring (Brent VanFossen, Inform 6). Remembered for great implementation of NPCs and a tranquil setting in a Rocky Mountain campsite. The Space Under the Window (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 6). Experimental story navigated through typing words to shift focus. Sunset Over Savannah (Ivan Cockrum, TADS). Beautifully written, tranquil exploration of a beach at a turning point in your character’s life. Tryst of Fate (G.M. Zagurski, Inform 6). A housewife bumps her head and ends up in a fantastical Wild West. UltraCorps (Stan James, VR-1 Entertainment). Commercial multiplayer browser game, one of the first of its kind for the web; turn-based space conquest strategy with a mostly text interface. We Descend (Bill Bly, Eastgate Systems). Hypertext novel in the form of an archive of documents by a scholar from a dark future. Zero Sum Game (Cody Sandifer, TADS). Play an adventurer who needs to return a pillaged kingdom to its original state. Zork: The Undiscovered Underground (Marc Blank, Michael Berlyn, and G. Kevin Wilson, Inform 6). Created as a tie-in for a new graphical Zork, this short text sequel paired two Infocom veterans with amateur IF writer Wilson.

1998
Anchorhead (Michael Gentry, Inform 6). Horror classic about a house and town hiding a dark Lovecraftian secret. Bad Machine (Dan Shiovitz, TADS). Interact with a malfunctioning robot via an alien interface. Enlightenment (Taro Ogawa, Inform 6). One-room puzzler, lovingly crafted homage to classic treasure hunts. Firebird (Bonnie Montgomery, TADS). An adventure in the mode of a Russian folk tale. Little Blue Men (Michael S. Gentry, Inform 6). Unusual game with elements of satire, horror, comedy, surreality, and office politics. Losing Your Grip (Stephen Granade, TADS). Allegorical journey through a modern-day addict’s recovering subconscious. Mother Loose (Irene Callaci, Inform 6). Lighthearted adventure in a nursery-rhyme world. Muse: An Autumn Romance (Christopher Huang, Inform 6). Victorian love story with unusual voice and protagonist, and elegant writing. Once and Future (G. Kevin Wilson, TADS). Ambitious time-traveling Arthurian epic in the classic adventure mold, years in the making and released commercially. The Plant (Michael J. Roberts, TADS). Well-implemented puzzle game set at a mysterious factory. Rice (geniwate, web). Collection of hypertext poems about a Westerner’s travels through Vietnam. Spider and Web (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 6). Spy thriller with a unique narrative and narratorial structure. The Unknown (William Gillespie et al., web). Heavily interlinked hypertext novel about three writers on a publicity tour. 

1999
Aisle (Sam Barlow, Inform 6). Influential one-room, one-move game. Exhibition (Ian Finley, TADS). Character-driven piece about remembering the life of a dead artist through the perspectives of four visitors to his final show. For a Change (Dan Schmidt, Inform 6). Unusual language and strange setting make for a memorable and distinctly textual game. Halothane (Ravi Rajkumar, Inform 6). An author enters his own discarded manuscript. Life’s Lottery (Kim Newman, Simon & Schuster). Serious gamebook by a novelist explores a British man’s life; can be read linearly or by making choices. The Mulldoon Legacy (Jon Ingold, Inform 6). Large puzzlefest with unique challenges and alternate solutions, set in a magical museum. Remembrance (Casey Tait, web). Much-maligned early attempt at a web-based interactive story interface, telling a story of soldiers in the first World War. Six Stories (Neil K. Guy, TADS). Extensive use of spoken narration, sound, and photography in a collection of interactive vignettes. Utopia (Mehul Patel, Solaria Games). Early complex browser game of real-time territory expansion and resource management in a fantasy kingdom. Varicella (Adam Cadre, Inform 6). Black humor, social engineering, and courtly intrigue. Winter Wonderland (Laura Knauth, Inform 6). IF Comp winner about a girl transported to a fantastical icy world. Worlds Apart (Suzanne Britton, TADS). Sprawling epic of self-discovery in a fantastical other world laden with explorable objects and complex characters. 