The 2000s


The moment more than half of american households had internet access came sometime in the year 2000, an apt milestone for the arrival of the new millennium. The vast majority were still connecting through slow dial-up services like America Online, which superbly captured the tremendous sea change from old media to new when it acquired the Time Warner media empire in 2001. But by the end of the decade, four out of five internet users had upgraded to always-on, high-speed broadband. The early web, largely text-driven by necessity, was vanishing with the arrival of streaming video and other high-bandwidth luxuries. 

Digital text was at a low point of mainstream popularity in a new century of multimedia, but fan communities were thriving like never before. The parser IF scene centered around the rec.arts.int-fiction newsgroup 1993 was producing dozens of innovative and increasingly sophisticated interactive stories each year. The first year of the decade alone saw the release of acclaimed titles like Emily Short’s Galatea 2000, about a complex conversation with a single character; Shade [Andrew Plotkin], a hallucinatory parable set in a one-room apartment; Rameses [Stephen Bond], a game about bullying and control that challenged traditional relationships between player and character; 9:05 [Adam Cadre], which merged interactivity with an unreliable narrator to produce an unforgettable twist; Ad Verbum [Nick Montfort], a wordplay game that asked players (among other challenges) to explore a series of rooms where only words beginning with the right letter were recognized; LASH [Paul O’Brian], a chilling exploration of Civil War–era slavery through the eyes of a time-folding robot; and Rematch [Andrew D. Pontious], a puzzle game that lasts only a single turn and requires replaying again and again to learn how to win. A new generation of interactive storytelling wizards were in their prime: authors like Andrew Plotkin, Adam Cadre, Emily Short, Paul O’Brian, Kathleen Fischer, Jon Ingold, Ian Finley, and many others were producing a stream of well-written and well-designed games. The community expanded beyond the single annual Interactive Fiction Competition with new recurring events like Spring Thing, IntroComp, One Room Game Comp, and the Halloween-themed EctoComp. Community resources like the IFDB (Interactive Fiction Database) and the IFWiki launched, signs of a community maturing past an initial growth spurt of enthusiasm toward long-term support networks and infrastructure that could serve it for decades to come. 

Some modern interactive fictions had become seasoned enough to be deemed new classics—a second generation of standards that could stand alongside the original hits of the 80s. With a slow but steady influx of new fans, text games began to get some recognition and coverage in the wider world of digital gaming, particularly the growing indie game scene that likewise came from small communities more interested in innovation than mainstream success. The 2000s saw the dawn of indie game festivals comparable to those celebrating indie films, with events like the Slamdance Guerilla Gamemaker Competition, IndieCade, and the Independent Games Festival (IGF) making their debuts. Text games began appearing at these festivals alongside graphical successes, giving them more visibility and credibility outside their niche. Some gamer news sites began to offer regular interactive fiction coverage (including JayIsGames, PlayThisThing, and TIGSource), and the Writers Guild of America, which represents film and TV writers, gave its first award to a game, Dead Head Fred [Vicious Cycle Software 2007].

Academia began to take serious notice of text games in the 2000s too, with scholarly studies of the genre like Nick Montfort’s Twisty Little Passages and Jeremy Douglass’s dissertation Command Lines. The blog Grand Text Auto covered literary gaming throughout the decade from a scholarly perspective. In 2006, the Electronic Literature Collection Volume 1 was released on CD-ROM, archiving sixty influential digital fictions from the ten years prior. Much as college film departments began to appear a few decades after film became entrenched as a form of popular entertainment, game studies was in its early infancy as an academic field: the number of departments would grow from a handful at the end of the 2000s to dozens, if not hundreds, a decade later.

Despite enthusiasm on many fronts, the 2000s saw very few commercial text games. Exceptions were mostly the work of ambitious amateurs hoping a market might still exist for quality games grounded in fondly remembered traditions of the past. 1893: A World’s Fair Mystery [Illuminated Lantern 2002] was a sprawling illustrated text adventure recreating the historic Chicago celebration in incredible detail, so large and comprehensive it included NPC-led orientation tours which new players were encouraged to seek out and attend at the posted times. Textfyre Inc. commissioned well-known IF authors to write full-length games for commercial sale, including Jack Toresal and the Secret Letter [Mike Gentry and David Cornelson 2009] and Klockwerk: The Shadow in the Cathedral [Ian Finley and Jon Ingold 2009]. While both endeavors found more enthusiasm than commercial success, they may have mostly been victims of timing. New platforms like e-readers, tablets, and smartphones were about to arrive that would open up many new options for reading digital text more comfortably, and the 2010s would see a resurgence of commercial text games in many forms for devices old and new.  

A second generation of tools for text game makers also appeared during the 2000s, improving on or supplementing the previous decade’s first stabs at opening up interactive storytelling to more creators. Inform 7 2008, a radical new natural language paradigm for authoring interactive fiction, upgraded its popular predecessor by building an entirely new, higher-level language on top of it. The language made it possible for authors to create complex conceptual structures within a traditional text adventure world model. Emily Short’s Alabaster [2009], for instance, improved on Galatea’s conversation model by defining high-level structures for how conversational quips could be sequenced, understood, or related to other aspects of the story world:

	Assumption relates various quips to various facts. The verb to assume (it assumes, they assume, it assumed, it is assumed) implies the assumption relation. An availability rule for a quip (called the target): if the target assumes a fact which is not known by the player, it is off-limits.

	A plausibility rule for a shallowly-buried quip (called target) (this is the pruning mid-level suggestions rule): if a quip indirectly-follows the current quip: it is dubious; […]

Other tools targeting different kinds of creators or different styles of text games also appeared throughout the decade. ADRIFT (Adventure Development & Runner Interactive Fiction Toolkit) provided a menu-based approach to crafting parser interactive fiction for creators without a background in traditional coding. Ren’Py provided a library built on top of Python that similarly made it easy for noncoders to create visual novels with a straightforward scripting language. More communities of makers outside the English speaking world were also springing up or consolidating: the online zine Terra d’IF launched in 2003 for the Italian interactive fiction community, and in 2005 French IF fans organized the first competition for titles in their native tongue.

Text game platforms were in the midst of a slow transition from standalone downloads to web-based apps. Web 2.0 tech was making it increasingly possible to run complex JavaScript applications directly from a browser window. Throughout the decade, increasingly sophisticated browser games like Utopia [Mehul Patel / Solaria Interactive 1999], Kingdom of Loathing [Asymmetric Publications 2003], Urban Dead [Kevan Davis 2005], Twilight Heroes [Quirkz Media 2007], and Fallen London [Failbetter Games 2009] provided an easy entry point to interactive prose that didn’t involve downloading, installing, and learning to use unfamiliar applications. Web-native story construction platforms like ChooseYourStory.com began to appear. Near the end of the decade, games for social media on platforms like Facebook arrived; many were at first primarily text-driven due to the limits of early social networking APIs, and games like Mob Wars [David Maestri 2008] thrived on these new, virally interconnected platforms. Parser interactive fiction began to move online as well: the 2008 debut of the Parchment library by Dannii Willis made it easy to run a story compiled by Inform in a web browser. 

The 2000s as a whole continued an era of fruitful experiments that had begun in the 1990s. A handful of stable tools continued to evolve, but the digital landscape was shifting underfoot, closing off old paradigms and platforms while opening up many new ones. Authors of interactive prose in the new century were adapting, giving no signs they were content to leave their medium behind in the old one. 


More Text Games from the 2000s

2000
9:05 (Adam Cadre, Inform 6). Getting ready for work seems mundane until a twist ending mandates a replay. Ad Verbum (Nick Montfort, Inform 6). Tricky linguistic challenges set in the mansion of the Wizard of Wordplay. Augmented Fourth (Brian Uri, Inform 6). Charming puzzlefest riffing off the old-school tradition, but with gentler challenges and a well-developed sense of humor. The Cove (Kathleen M. Fischer, Inform 6). IF Art Show Landscape invites you to reflect on a beautiful seaside scene at a turning point in your character’s life. Dangerous Curves (Irene Callaci, Inform 6). Open-world noir detective yarn with useful convenience features and ambitious scope. Fail-Safe (Jon Ingold, Inform 6). Help an astronaut through the the aftermath of a deadly attack. Kaged (Ian Finley, TADS). Orwellian dystopia where the player’s freedom is as constrained as the character’s. LASH—Local Asynchronous Satellite Hookup (Paul O’Brian, Inform 6). Sci-fi story about a scavenger robot on a future Earth who can link to disturbing visions of its past. Masquerade (Kathleen M. Fischer, Inform 6). Antebellum romance with a strongly painted heroine and multiple endings. Metamorphoses (Emily Short, Inform 6). Well-designed simulationist fantasy puzzler; transmute elemental essences for fun and profit. Rameses (Stephen Bond, Inform 6). A bullied teen at a boarding school resists the player’s attempts to make him stand up for himself, presaging later games like Depression Quest. Rematch (Andrew D. Pontious, TADS). Relive the single moment before your untimely death until you figure out how to escape it. Shade (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 6). A top-ten classic: what begins as a one-room game in your apartment devolves into a surreal dreamlike parable. Shrapnel (Adam Cadre, Inform 6). Like the author’s Photopia, a story told in disconnected fragments, here pushing against the limits of IF conventions and interfaces.  

2001
All Roads (Jon Ingold, Inform 6). Award-sweeping, story-centric trip through an alt-universe Venice weaves together vignettes that at first seem unconnected. The Beetmonger’s Journal (Scott Starkey, TADS). Unique structure where the player character and viewpoint character are different: you play the hero’s chronicler. Best of Three (Emily Short, Inform 6). A reunion with an old flame can go in various surprising directions; experiments with hybrid parser and menu-driven conversation interface. Castle Marrach (Skotos Tech, StoryBuilder). Social storytelling MUD set in a single huge castle, with unique features for narration, understanding, and conversation. Earth and Sky (Paul O’Brian, Inform 6). Start of a well-crafted and much-loved trilogy about superhero siblings. Fallacy of Dawn (Robb Sherwin, Hugo). Start of a loose sci-fi trilogy in the memorably described cyberpunk city of New Haz. First Things First (J. Robinson Wheeler, TADS). Well-designed time travel puzzle game. The Gostak (Carl Muckenhoupt, Inform 6). Fascinating puzzle game inspired by the linguistics observation that English speakers can parse well-formed nonsense like “The gostak distims the doshes.”. Heroes (Sean Barrett, Inform 6). By switching between five viewpoint characters you gain a better understanding of their fantasy city than any one individually. Majestic (Anim-X/Electronic Arts, Win). Ambitious early ARG in which characters contacted you via multiple real-life channels like phone calls and instant messages. Moments Out of Time (L. Ross Raszewski, Inform 6). As a time-traveling historian, explore and document an ordinary home just before an apocalyptic disaster. Pytho’s Mask (Emily Short, Inform 6). Practical astrology, romance, a royal ball, and a cast of scheming characters; conversation-heavy classic. SmarterChild (ActiveBuddy, instant messaging). Chatbot that attracted over 30 million instant message buddies on AIM and Yahoo Messenger. These Waves of Girls (Caitlin Fisher, Flash). Brilliantly written hypertext novella exploring the narrator’s memories of formative relationships and sexual awakenings. TriadCity (SmartMonsters, Java). MUD with literary influences and emphasis on nonviolent solutions, with advanced features like subjective room descriptions. Uplink (Introversion Software, Win/Mac). Well-remembered hacking simulator with chiptunes soundtrack and text-driven interface. Voices (Aris Katsaris, Inform 6). Short emotionally charged story where the player takes a unique role in the life of Joan of Arc. 

2002
1893: A World’s Fair Mystery (Peter Nepstad, TADS). Incredibly detailed explorable recreation of a historic event; there’s a plot in there somewhere too. Accounts of the Glass Sky (M.D. Coverley, Flash). Literary hypertext with multimedia components about memory and disillusionment, influenced by the 9/11 attacks. Earth and Sky 2: Another Earth, Another Sky (Paul O’Brien, Inform 6). Superhero sibling sequel, winner of IF Comp 2002. Faith (Robert Kendall, Flash). A kinetic poem in five stages on the relation between faith and logic. The Gamma Gals (Christopher Cole, ADRIFT). Adult IF where your girlfriend, Erin, invites you over to her sexy sorority; noteworthy for naming the Erin, trophy of the Adult Interactive Fiction Awards. Lock & Key (Adam Cadre, Inform 6). Try to stop the hero from escaping in this iterative dungeon design puzzle. The Moonlit Tower (Yoon Ha Lee, Inform 6). Debut from the future novelist; evocative writing based in Eastern mythology, with multiple endings. Photograph: A Portrait of Reflection (Steve Evans, Inform 6). A man looks back on a life gone wrong, but something else is also going on... The PK Girl (Robert Goodwin, ADRIFT). Sci-fi thriller/dating sim with multiple endings, including anime-style graphics and soundtrack. Progress Quest (Eric Fredricksen, Win). Textual parody of RPGs, progenitor of the clicker game. Savoir-Faire (Emily Short, Inform 6). Eighteenth-century mystery with unique magic system based on linking conceptually similar objects. Soliloquy (Kenneth Goldsmith, web). Online adaptation of a gallery exhibition featuring an unedited account of every word spoken by the author for a week. Storyland (Nanette Wylde, Flash). Combinatorial story generator. Sun and Moon (David Brain, web). Story split across multiple fictional websites with passwords and puzzles unlocking more content. Tinseltown Blues (Chip Hayes, Inform 6). Hollywood-set scavenger hunt puzzlefest; first entrant and first winner of Spring Thing. 

2003
City of Secrets (Emily Short, Inform 6). Explore an intriguing city powered by tech and magic; filled with details to explore and sophisticated worldbuilding. Episode in the Life of an Artist (Peter Eastman, TADS). A menial worker believes himself an artist and genius, but is replaced at his job by a machine. Hamlet—The Text Adventure (Robin Johnson, Nondescript). A breezy, comedic retelling mixed with material from other Shakespeare plays in classic text adventure form. To Hell in a Hamper (J. J. Guest, ADRIFT). A Victorian balloonist must lighten his hot air balloon before it crosses the path of an active volcano. Narcolepsy (Adam Cadre, Inform 6). Best Writing XYZZY winner is played in two windows: thoughts and reality. Risorgimento Represso (Michael J. Coyne, Inform 6). A sizable wizard’s apprentice puzzlefest lauded for thorough implementation, humor, and unique magic. Scavenger (Quintin Stone, TADS). In a postapocalyptic world, search an underground base for secrets of the past. shadows on the mirror (Chrysoula Tzavelas, TADS). A woman with mysterious powers is trapped in a car with her kidnapper. Slouching Towards Bedlam (Star Foster and Daniel Ravipinto, Inform 6). Steampunk adventure and delicious existential terror; swept the XYZZYs and IF Comp. The Tarot Reading (Michael Penman, TADS). Receive a reading and question the major arcana for thoughts on life, art, and other subjects. Torn (Joe Chedburn, web). Text MMO where gangs compete for business in a criminal underworld; had over a million users by 2008. The Wal*Mart Game (thatguy, ChooseYourStory.com). Irreverent choice-based game in which your local mart has been occupied by terrorists and it’s up to you to save the day.

2004
The Act of Misdirection (Callico Harrison, Inform 6). A Victorian magician’s act may be more than she bargained for. All Things Devours (half sick of shadows, Inform 6). A compact, clever time-travel puzzle. Back to Life… Unfortunately (David Whyld, ADRIFT). A comedy in which the goal is to die. The Battle of Walcot Keep (Steve Breslin et al., TADS). Experiment in individual NPCs taking actions during a battle. Bellclap (Tommy Herbert, Inform 6). Personified parser is an angel conveying your divine instructions to mortals. Blue Chairs (Chris Klimas, Inform 6). Psychedelic, surreal story considered a modern classic. The Cabal (Stephen Bond, Inform 6). Satirizes conspiracy theorists with a secret society that influences the world of interactive fiction. Future Boy! (Kent Tessman et al., Hugo). Commercially released parser-based superhero game featuring animation and voice acting. Jazz auf Tegemis (Joerg Rosenbauer, Inform 6). An off-duty spaceship merchant captain meets an alien jazz singer in this German sci-fi adventure. Necrotic Drift (Robb Sherwin, Hugo). An RPG nerd fights for his life against a mall of undead D&D monsters. Things (Jacqueline A. Lott Ashwell and Sam Kabo Ashwell, TADS). Constrained speed-IF written using only one noun. Thy Dungeonman (Videlectrix, Flash). Homestar Runner’s spoof of early text games famous for the catchphrase “You can’t get ye flask.”

2005
All Hope Abandon (Eric Eve, TADS). After a heart attack at a theological convention, the player’s actions will determine if they return to life or spend eternity elsewhere. Beyond (Roberto Grassi et al., Inform 6). The spirit of a never-born child assists an investigation into the death of her pregnant mother. Bolivia by Night (Aidan Doyle, TADS). Taking a job with a local newspaper leads to a search for a missing colleague in this informative ode to Bolivia. Building (Poster, Inform 6). A surreal horror game with an emphasis on atmosphere; explore an abandoned office building. Le Cercle des Gros Geeks disparus (Adrien Saurat, Inform 6). Winner of French Comp 2005, wherein the player completes a bizarre contraption using one of several friends’ plans, each leading to a different ending. Conan Kill Everything (Ian Haberkorn, Inform 6). As Conan the Barbarian, do what’s expected. The Corn Identity (Carl Muckenhoupt et al., Inform 6). An “exquisite corpse” collaboration between thirteen authors, each writing a segment based only on the previous episode. Distress (Mike Snyder, Hugo). A dire tale of survival after a spaceship pod crash-lands on an alien planet. Escape to New York (Richard Otter, ADRIFT). In April of 1912, an art thief bound for New York must recover his loot, avoid the law, and escape from an “unsinkable” passenger ship. Vespers (Jason Devlin, Inform 6). Fifteenth-century abbot investigates a monastery beset by plague, madness, and murder.

2006
Child’s Play (Stephen Granade, Inform 7). The protagonist is uniquely limited compared to most IF heroes—they’re a baby. De Baron (Victor Gijsbers, Inform 6). Try to save your daughter in this dark examination of human evil. Delightful Wallpaper (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 7). A logic maze of passageways and a murder mystery where the player collects and places motivations in characters. Ekphrasis (JB Ferrant, Inform 6). A massive French game in which an art historian searches across Europe for a stolen painting. Escape from the Crazy Place (J. J. Guest et al., TADS). This wacky choice-based comedy featuring a zillion surreal situations began on paper in 1984 and continues to be expanded to this day. Floatpoint (Emily Short, Inform 7). A symbolic gift will determine the fate of almost-human space colonists returning to Earth. The Journey of the King (Peter Nepstad, TADS). An implementation of Lord Dunsany’s novella by the same name, written in a similar high diction. Voices of Spoon River (Jon Scoresby et al., Inform 6). Adventure designed as a tool for teaching Edgar Lee Masters’ classic anthology. The Warlord, the Princess & the Bulldog (David Whyld, ADRIFT). A commando must rescue a princess in this action comedy where puzzles can be skipped for a cost.

2007
An Act of Murder (Christopher Huang, Inform 7). A Victorian whodunnit with a variable murderer. Dead Cities (Jon Ingold, Inform 7). Best in Show at the HP Lovecraft Commonplace Book Project 2007, celebrating the seventieth anniversary of the author’s death. Deadline Enchanter (Anya DeNiro, Inform 7). A metapuzzle that refigures the usual relationship between the player and the parser. A Fine Day for Reaping (James Webb, ADRIFT). The Grim Reaper must ensure five souls keep their appointment; XYZZY Best Story winner. Lord Bellwater’s Secret (Sam Gordon, Inform 7). Well-regarded one-room puzzler set in a Victorian gentleman’s bedroom. Lost Pig (Admiral Jota, Inform 6). Narrated by orc Grunk, this comedy is often cited as one of the greatest IFs of all time. Public Secrets (Sharon Daniel and Erik Loyer, Flash). Interactive documentary about incarcerated women told through animated text and recorded audio. Suveh Nux (David Fisher, Inform 6). Learn a wizard’s magical language to escape his vault. The Symbolic Engine (Evan Schull, Inform 7). Explore a peculiar device in this slice of “digital anthropology from the future” that took Best of Show in the last IF Art Show. Treasures of a Slaver’s Kingdom (S. John Ross, Inform 7). This comedic faux-retro adventure includes a full scan of the pen-and-paper roleplaying game it claims to be based on. Twilight Heroes (Quirkz Media, web). Multiplayer browser game of superheroes and villains.

2008
Afflicted (Doug Egan, Inform 7). A health inspector documenting the violations of a dive bar discovers layers of mystery and horror under the mold. Buried In Shoes (Kazuki Mishima, Inform 6). Unbearable history told through fragmented vignettes. Everybody Dies (Jim Munroe, Inform 7). Can three grocery store workers with intertwined fates stop each other from dying? Fitting the Pattern (Christine Wilks, Flash). Use dressmaking tools to reveal pieces of a larger, nonlinear memoir. Forumwarz (Crotch Zombie Productions, web). Browser RPG parodying internet culture. Gun Mute (C.E.J. Pacian, TADS). A queer western with creative villains that turns shoot-outs into puzzles. The Moon Watch (Paolo Maroncelli and Alessandro Peretti, Inform 6). In 1967, one Soviet bureaucrat gets sent to Russia’s new moon base and immediately faces crisis inside his “tin box.” Mrs. Pepper’s Nasty Secret (Jim Aikin and Eric Eve, TADS). Short adventure meant for new parser players, winner of IFBeginnersComp. Nightfall (Eric Eve, Inform 7). Explore an abandoned city and your memories of an intriguing vanished character. Once upon a winter night, the ragman came singing under your window (Expio, Inform 7). Solve a monster’s riddle or be cursed in this dark, creepy fairy tale. Piracy 2.0 (Sean Huxter, Inform 6). Escape a space pirate’s brig and bring them to justice in this complex, open-ended adventure. Snack Time! (Renee Choba, Inform 7). Play from the point of view of a dog trying to get a snack in this charming and inventive game.

2009
69,105 Keys (David Welbourn, Inform 6). Clever small puzzler based on disambiguating objects by taking advantage of Inform’s parse_name routine. Alabaster (Emily Short et al., Inform 7). A retelling of Snow White from the huntsman’s perspective; written by eleven authors with eighteen different endings. The Ascot (Duncan Bowsman, ADRIFT). Brief, zany adventure where the only possible commands are yes or no … or are they? Blue Lacuna (Aaron A. Reed, Inform 7). Epic story about wanderers between worlds with a complex central NPC. Broken Legs (Sarah Morayati, Inform 7). After a bad audition, aspiring theater student Lottie Plum plans to sabotage her way into acceptance at an acting school. Byzantine Perspective (Lea Albaugh, Inform 7). A short heist game built around a unique spatial perspective puzzle. Earl Grey (Rob Dubbin and Allison Parrish, Inform 6). A comedic fantasy wordplay game where the player can knock a single letter out of a word or cast a letter into it. The Endling Archive (Kazuki Mishima, Inform 6). Story told through a database of the extinct and the lost that is equal parts informative, speculative, and personal. The King of Shreds and Patches (Jimmy Maher, Inform 7). Full-length game of Lovecraftian horror in Elizabethan England. Make It Good (Jon Ingold, Inform 6). Elaborately plotted mystery where a detective guilty of murder must use his investigation to frame someone else. Rover’s Day Out (Benjamin Collins-Sussman and Jack Welch, Inform 7). Meta sci-fi story where an AI character’s daily tasks control a spaceship. The Shadow in the Cathedral (Ian Finley and Jon Ingold, Inform 7). Commercial release from Textfyre telling a well-crafted classic adventure in a steampunky world. Shelter From the Storm (Eric Eve, TADS). WW2-set game with unusual voice for IF: first person, past tense. Walker & Silhouette (C.E.J. Pacian, TADS). A detective and a flapper solve unusual crimes; noteworthy for clickable interface to parser-based world.
