
Lieux communs ("Common Places")

2007

ifiction.free.fr, including JB, Stormi (Samuel Verschelde), Otto Grimwald (Eric Forgeot), Mule hollandaise (Hugo Labrande), Jean-Luc Pontico, and Stab
Language: Inform 6 
Style: Parser
First Published: June 15, 2007

Opening Text:

	Après avoir cheminé quelques heures dans des territoires pour moi encore relativement familiers, je m’étais retrouvé à continuer cette balade vers un chemin inconnu, sans m’en rendre tout à fait compte à ce moment.

	Je pouvais ainsi poursuivre au _nord_ et longer la rive d’un fleuve allant vers un océan non répertorié sur les cartes du monde actuel...


	After walking some hours in territories still relatively known to me, I found myself continuing along an unknown path, without in that moment quite realizing it.

	I could therefore continue _north_ and follow the bank of a river flowing toward an ocean not listed on maps of the material world...


El museo de las consciencias ("The Museum of Consciences")

2007 

Mel Hython a.k.a Melitón (Juan Antonio Paz Salgado), Santiago Eximeno, Urbatain a.k.a. Ruber Eaglenest (Ruben Alberto Aguilera Nieto), Grendel Khan (Xavier Carrascosa) and Depresiv (Pablo Martínez Merino)
Language: Inform 7 [with InformSP7]
Style: Parser
First Published: June 15, 2007

Opening Text:

	Tu padre te abandonó cuando aún no tenías uso de razón. Te dejó en una casa en la cima de una pequeña colina, al cuidado de dos mujeres siniestras, eternamente vestidas de negro. Te abandonó a los rincones oscuros, a las alargadas sombras de la vieja casa, a los silencios y al tedio. Puede que tu padre haya muerto en algún lugar allá fuera. Esperas y deseas que haya sido así.

	Your father abandoned you when you were too young to remember. He left you in a house on the top of a little hill, in the care of two sinister women forever dressed in black. He abandoned you to the dark corners and long shadows of the old house, to its silences and to its monotony. Perhaps your father died, somewhere out there. You hope and dream that he did.


“There’s this great bubble that is english interactive fiction,” a Spanish-speaking game maker once wrote,

	free from problems or constant threats. Hovering outside it are other, smaller bubbles, communities using other languages, influenced by the English bubble but incapable of influencing the others, unable to communicate with them. That lack of communication leads them to feel isolated, at first, and then a sense of futility, when efforts to carry out a project aren’t rewarded, when the number of potential players of one of our stories doesn’t compensate for the work we’ve invested in them.18

The author, Depresiv—like many in the Spanish IF community, he goes by a handle there rather than his given name—was explaining how he came to be involved with an unusual project that brought together text game creators working in English, Spanish, and French. The unifying theme of the project was connected to American horror writer H. P. Lovecraft, but that wasn’t why Depresiv wanted to take part. Instead, his motivation was “the possibility that something like this, in which three different languages live together in the same project, might help break that silence.” 

The project was centered around Lovecraft’s “Commonplace Book,” a collection of over two hundred mostly unused ideas the writer had compiled during his career. For the seventieth anniversary of his death, the Maison d’Ailleurs, a museum of science fiction in Switzerland, had decided to stage an exhibition with a unique twist: artists would be invited to choose a single idea from the book and create an artwork inspired by it. A hundred artists would end up participating, including well-known names like writer Christopher Priest (The Prestige) and artist H. R. Giger, who picked idea #144:

	Hideous book glimpsed in ancient shop—never seen again.

American IF author Peter Nepstad had been doing research for a series of horror games inspired by Lovecraft predecessors like Lord Dunsany when he stumbled on the Swiss museum’s website. Since writers were already included, penning original short stories for the exhibition’s catalog, it struck him that the museum might be open to including interactive fiction inspired by Lovecraft as well. The submission deadline had already passed, but Nepstad emailed the curator anyway, with the thought of contributing an original game inspired by a “Commonplace Book” entry. The museum was located in the French-speaking part of Switzerland and, eager to sweeten the deal, Nepstad promised—perhaps unwisely—that he could arrange for some French work to be included as well. The curator wrote back and seemed open to the idea, saying “Something in English + French would be great.”15 Now Nepstad had a problem: not a French speaker, he suddenly needed to find one who could write IF, was a fan of horror, and would be interested in participating in a cooperative project in a very short time frame.

Fortunately, a French IF game called Ekphrasis [2006] had recently made waves in the English-speaking community via translation, winning rare multilingual acclaim. Nepstad reached out to its author, who went by JB, to see if he might be interested in the project. “You could just do a translation of my game,” Nepstad offered, “but that doesn’t sound like as much fun.”15 JB reposted the offer on ifiction.free.fr, a forum of French-speaking IF creators, to see if there was any interest. A poster there who went by Otto Grimwald (today better known as Eric Forgeot) asked in response, “Pourquoi pas en faire une IF commune?” (Why not make it a communal IF?)

It might be nice if there were several of us working together, which will be more fun (no doubt), take less work (maybe), and would still let us finish [our own games for] the French competition (which, of course, is imperative…)9

The French IF community had an almost entirely different backstory than the English-speaking one. While most American and British fans had grown up playing (or at least retroactively admiring) the classic 1980s text adventures of companies like Infocom or Magnetic Scrolls, France had skipped over pure text games entirely. By the mid-1980s, when enough personal computers were on the market there to warrant a professional games market, graphics were already well established, and since many young game makers were strongly influenced by the huge French comics scene, there was little appetite for making games with no art. It wasn’t until the 2000s, when a handful of French speakers discovered the newer games of the English IF renaissance like Photopia 1998 and Galatea 2000, that a community of French fans came together to try making their own text-only games. Attempts came slowly—first translations, then original titles—with the first regular French IF competition, mirroring the English-centric IF Comp, not appearing until 2005. French interactive fiction was still young, and Nepstad’s invitation seemed a great opportunity to showcase it to a community of international players. The French authors proposed a communal game, an omnibus of short pieces each inspired by a different entry from Lovecraft’s tome of ideas. They titled it Lieux communs, or Common Places, after both their collaborative effort and the source of inspiration.

With not just one or two titles but a whole collection of games now in the works, Nepstad hoped to broaden participation as widely as possible, and he announced the project on the English IF newsgroups on April 9, 2007. Anyone was welcome to contribute a game in any language, though with a deadline just two months away. A few years earlier, Nepstad had found modest commercial success selling a boxed IF game on CD-ROM—his ambitious historical adventure 1893: A World’s Fair Mystery [2002]—and he’d started a company called Illuminated Lantern to sell it and explore the possibilities of publishing more interactive fiction. The Commonplace Book Project, he thought, had the potential to become something quite unique: a multilingual anthology of IF that could be exhibited at festivals and archived in libraries, an ambassador for text games to horror fans around the world.

Another international IF community took note of Nepstad’s announcement. Spanish interactive fiction had developed on yet another unique trajectory. The larger number of Spanish speakers worldwide had made commercial text games in the language more viable in the 80s, and aventuras conversacionales (conversational adventures) were for a while a popular market share. One game company based in Spain had a unique line for their text adventures called Aventuras AD, and a fan club called CAAD (Club de Aventuras AD) became a popular community hub for enthusiasts toward the end of the decade. CAAD held contests for homebrew games written in languages like PAW or the Spanish-specific tool SINTAC (Sistema INTegrado de creación de Aventuras Conversacionales). When commercial text games died, clubs like CAAD and an existing culture of amateur games kept Spanish-speaking fans more unified than English fans had been. The wave of tools like Inform that came out of the 90s English IF renaissance were eagerly adopted by the Spanish community, with fan-made libraries like José Luis Diaz’s InformATE—Inform Ahora Totalmente en Español (Now Totally in Spanish)—providing a foundation for many new works. Within days of Nepstad’s announcement, a group of Spanish authors contacted him to say that their community, too, wanted to submit an anthology game. Over a dozen stories in three different languages were now planned to be part of the project.

Not all participants were especially enamored of Lovecraft. While his writings had become a foundational pillar of genre fan culture at the end of the twentieth century, fewer and fewer readers were willing to overlook the implicit and often entirely explicit racism in the famously xenophobic writer’s work. In response to Nepstad’s announcement, one poster noted that “Commonplace Book” entry #108 was Educated mulatto seeks to displace personality of white man and occupy his body. Not all fans had yet begun the deeper soul-searching that would result in a more thorough condemnation and reevaluation of Lovecraft over the next decade (resulting in novels like Lovecraft Country and The Ballad of Black Tom, among others). But some of the Commonplace Book Project authors kept the tension in mind while creating their entries. One of the Spanish pieces begins with a familiar story of a white man making an archaeological dig in nineteenth-century Africa, but has the player take on the role of a local Maasai warrior with a less foolish perspective than the viejo mago blanco (old white wizard) who would undoubtedly have been Lovecraft’s narrator. “The horror of Lovecraft and his friends was based on fear of the other, the strange,” wrote Melitón, another of the Spanish contributors. “It seems to me kind of outdated, from the beginning of the twentieth century.”18

With only two months to write, each community adopted different strategies for organizing and creating their games. The French IFers set up a source code repository and, rather than give each author ownership of particular stories, encouraged anyone in the community to contribute to each story however they could, “whether with art, writing text, researching ideas or puzzles, proofreading, correcting spelling, grammar or coordination etc.”8 Filling in missing item or room descriptions was a way even a busy student could contribute (at least one collaborator was still in high school), and the final game would be credited to all of ifiction.free.fr, rather than individual authors. The collaborators first agreed on a frame story—a ghostly caravan filled with mysterious objects, based on “Commonplace Book” entry #99:

	Salem story—the cottage of an aged witch—wherein after her death are found sundry terrible things.

Forgeot set up an Inform 6 file for the frame story with a script that could fold in other story files found within the source repository. Authors were asked to name their files with the number of their “Commonplace Book” inspiration, and to give any items the same number as a suffix, to avoid namespace problems (“because if you have a door called Door, and I have the same in my game, it will get stuck”9). In part to make the project more accessible to imagined players in a Swiss art gallery, the team decided to include music and illustrations, and to keep puzzles simple. While the style and subject varied with each story and contributor, many of the French games trended more philosophical and dreamlike, their prose flowing perhaps better in the original than in translation:

	Le long de la rivière
	Voici où nous mènent nos pas, lorsqu’on les confie à nos pensées dérivantes…

	Las d’un voyage dont seules les parts obscures de mon imagination en étaient les étapes, je me trouvai malgré moi loin de tout, sur les rives d’un fleuve charriant des eaux sombres vers un Océan dont la rumeur saline me parvenait indistinctement.


	Along the river
	Here is where our steps lead us, when we entrust them to our drifting thoughts… 

	Weary of a journey with only the most obscure parts of my imagination as its stages, I found myself far from everything, on the banks of a river carrying dark waters toward an Ocean whose saline rumblings reached me but obscurely.

One vignette begins with you drifting at sea, the lost survivor of a shipwreck. Coming to rest on a spar of jagged obsidian, you find a bronze trapdoor inscribed with the sigil of an eye surrounded by eight tentacles. After opening it you descend into murky darkness through dripping-wet caverns, eventually passing through a gate unlocked by a sonic code to find an enormous city, La Cité sous les Eaux (the City Under the Water):

	Résister à la folie… et contempler, dans leurs insaisissables dimensions, les blocs monolithiques verdâtres, alignés selon une géométrie non euclidienne, des statues gargantuesques et immondes gravées de hiéroglyphes dérangeants, de tous côtés, et même au-dessus sur un plafond lointain que je me refusais d’imaginer.

	To resist the madness… and contemplate, in their elusive dimensions, the green-tinged monolithic blocks, aligned in a non-Euclidean geometry, gargantuan and filthy statues engraved with disturbing hieroglyphs on all sides, even above on a distant ceiling that I couldn’t bring myself to imagine.

The Spanish community’s games hewed closer to the standard auteur-driven mode of IF authorship, with each vignette given a title and credited to particular authors, and thus they exhibited a somewhat wider range of styles and subjects. Here the frame story was inspired by entry #167: 

	Boy rear’d in atmosphere of considerable mystery. Believes father dead. Suddenly is told that father is about to return. Strange preparations—consequences.

The “strange preparations” in El museo de las consciencias (The Museum of Consciences) involve a gallery of curious relics assembled by your absent father. As in Lieux communs, each object is an excuse to transition into a new vignette. The Spanish collaborators, in contrast to the French authors newly arrived to the hobby, were mostly old veterans of the 80s scene, and they brought a range of concepts and styles to the scenarios they created. In one scene set in the present day, you play an addict whose bad coke trip triggers a hallucinogenic nightmare. “Trying to convey through written words what a drugged mind might feel is very difficult,” wrote reviewer Dwalin for SPAC, a Spanish IF review site, “even more so when given the form of an interactive story. The result is very disconcerting at first.”6

	>x cd
	Ojos gusanos cornea se posan sobre la caja de CD. Literalmente se esfuma ante tus ojos, junto con las cositas verdes. Humo blanco sale y forma como caras-gusanos-colmillo en el aire.

	Ahí fuera está ese tipo. Es bueno es calidad, 30 euros. Pagas y tomas-sonrisa podrida de dientes-rubia gusanos come ojos. Excelente material el del umbral. eso es todo- ojos azules se acercan-algo de molestia al desgarrar la córnea eso es todo, pagas y te vas.

	>sal del coche
	Aproximas tu mano hacia la puerta, pero gusanos verdes cornea salen de tu piel. La han devorado y buscando a ciegas encuentras el suelo entre vómitos de JB y Mc’Donalds—Caen más gusanos de tí y el cemento se vuelve tierra fresca. Gusanos salen de tus orejas y la música de discoteca suena como tambores de guerra en la lejanía. No es cierto y sin embargo ahí está—sin duda—muy conocido. Caras-gusano se esfuman en el aire como billetes y por un momento dejas de gritar. […]

	Te tocas la cara y te frotas los ojos, sí los tienes. De hecho, estás bastante bien, a pesar de los temblores y el sudor frio que empapa tu ropa. Algo hay que no va bien, tras las plantas te pareció haber observado un extraño movimiento. ¿Plantas?

	>examina plantas
	Ya te he dicho—chaval—que todo son imaginaciones tuyas. sin duda es producto de las drogas y de tu inagotable imaginación-es bueno es calidad. monos en el aire como gusanos-córnea alimentándose de pulpa en deportivos rojos. plantas moviéndose en el umbral.


	>examine cd
	Corneal eyeworms pose on the cover of the CD case. It literally vanishes before your eyes, along with the little green things. White smoke rises and forms wormfangfaces in the air.

	That guy is out there. Good stuff good quality, 30 euros. You pay and take it—smile rotten with teeth—pale eye-eating worms. The threshold’s got great stuff. that’s all—blue eyes getting closer—some discomfort when tearing the cornea that’s all, you pay and you go.

	>get out of the car
	You reach for the door, but green corneaworms sprout from your skin. They’ve devoured it and searching blindly you find the ground amidst vomited JB and McDonalds—More worms fall from you and the cement becomes fresh earth. Worms burst from your ears and club music sounds like war drums in the distance. Not true and yet there it is, no doubt, very known. Wormfaces evaporate into the air like scattering bills and for a moment you stop screaming. […]

	You touch your face and rub your eyes, yes you have them. In fact, you’re doing quite well, despite the shivering and cold sweat soaking your clothes. Something’s wrong, behind the plants you think you see weird movement. Plants?

	>look at plants
	I already told you—kid—it’s all your imagination. without a doubt a product of drugs and your inexhaustible imagination—good stuff good quality. monkeys floating in the air like corneaworms feeding on flesh in red sports cars. plants moving on the threshold.

The distant music turns out to be from a demonic rave happening behind the unreal vegetation, reachable perhaps only because of your drugged state (and inspired by entry #11: Odd nocturnal ritual. Beasts dance and march to musick). The scene degenerates into a demonic orgy—“Yeah, we snuck a pornographic piece into a Swiss museum,” one of the collaborators cheekily recalled. In another scene with a wholly different tone, you become a member of an ancient, doomed sea-dwelling people:

	>entra Al mar
	Con agilidad propia de tu raza saltas hacia el mar y él te recibe con suavidad. Sois partes de una misma cosa.

	El Mar
	Esto es el mar. ¿Qué más hay que decir? Es el Lugar. Todo viene de estas aguas siempre en movimiento, siempre frías, siempre amables… 


	>enter the sea
	With the agility typical of your people, you dive into the sea, and he receives you gently. You are parts of the same thing.

	The Sea
	This is the sea. What more is there to say? It is the Place. Everything comes from these waters always in motion, always cold, always kind… 

Writing IF in languages other than English was made much simpler by using Inform, which had been designed with an eye for localization—in fact, a hefty chapter of its manual concerned teaching it to read and write other languages. A language definition file could instruct Inform in how to do everything from recognizing verbs:
	Verb "ecrire"
	    *                                       -> Ecrire
	    * 'sur'/'dans' noun                     -> Ecrire
	    * 'avec' held                           -> Ecrire
	    * 'sur'/'dans' noun 'avec' held         -> Ecrire
	    * 'avec' held 'sur'/'dans' noun         -> Ecrire
	    * topic 'sur'/'dans' noun               -> Ecrire
	    * topic 'avec' held                     -> Ecrire
	    * topic 'sur'/'dans' noun 'avec' held   -> Ecrire
	    * topic 'avec' held 'sur'/'dans' noun   -> Ecrire
	    * topic                                 -> Ecrire;

To parsing pronouns:

	Array LanguagePronouns table

	   !  word       possible GNAs
	   !             to follow:
	   !             a     i
	   !             s  p  s  p
	   !             mfnmfnmfnmfn

	      ! Object pronouns
	      '-le'    $$100000100000
	      '-la'    $$010000010000
	      '-les'   $$000110000110
	      '-lui'   $$110000110000
	      '-leur'  $$000110000110
	  ! Disjunctive pronouns
	      'luy'    $$110000110000 
	      'lui'    $$100000100000
	      'elle'   $$010000010000
	      'eux'    $$000110000110
	      'elles'  $$000010000010

To printing default messages:

	Close: switch (n) {
	           1: "Fermer cela me semblait impossible. ";
	           2: print (ctheyreorthats) x1, " déjà fermé";
	              if (x1 has female) "e.";
	              ".";
	           3: "Je fermai ", (the) x1, ".";
	}

Each new language definition had to solve its own unique problems. While spaces work well to separate tokens in an English command like take the bag, more elaborate strategies were necessary to pull out the components of a French command like aller a l’est (go east), or a Spanish reflexive verb like examinarme (examine myself). Gender in English only exists for animates (humans and animals), but authors in both French and Spanish needed to define a gender for every object in their simulated worlds so the game could correctly understand, and generate sentences about, both un pendentif and une pioche. Both languages also faced challenges with dialects. While the original Inform supports switching between American and British English, the minor spelling and style variations that result are less significant than the stakes behind setting a Spanish game to dialecto sudamericano versus dialecto castellano. The verb in Spain for “to take,” for instance, has a vulgar meaning in parts of Latin America, so setting the correct dialect is key to avoiding the kind of awkward mistake sometimes seen while playing Spanish games via online translation services, which don’t have the benefit of regional context:

	>take the bag
	Fucked.

As the French and Spanish teams sprinted toward a polished set of vignettes for their anthologies, Nepstad invited other communities to participate. He reached out to fans making graphical adventure games, leading to two point-and-click submissions from creators working in engines called Wintermute and Lassie. Among English IF authors, one submission came in using the user-friendly creation tool ADRIFT, which lets authors define a game mostly through menus rather than code. Jon Ingold, later to co-found game studio inkle, contributed a well-regarded piece, Dead Cities, inspired by one of the most scattered “Commonplace Book” entries, #67:

	An impression—city in peril—dead city—equestrian statue—men in closed room—clattering hooves heard outside—marvel disclosed on looking out—doubtful ending.

Nepstad contributed his own game written in his favorite IF design language, TADS. In total, seven games were included, almost every one using a different framework for making interactive fiction—a fascinating snapshot of community tooling at the end of the century’s first decade. If each story in the French and Spanish anthologies were counted separately, the whole project included a hefty twenty games. The entries debuted on the IF newsgroups on June 18, 2007; afterward, Nepstad worked with the authors to polish up final versions and assemble them in a slicker package that included a unified launcher, which he then submitted to the Swiss curator. The games were accepted into the exhibition, which opened at the Maison d’Ailleurs just in time for Halloween that year and ran through the following spring. In a gallery filled with creepy art, a computer in a corner let attendees take a break to play through a handful of creepy interactive stories too.

As Depresiv had noted, each community of game makers lives in its own bubble, often isolated from others by barriers of technology, privilege, convention, and language. Sometimes it’s hard to keep those bubbles afloat. Nepstad had also reached out to the Italian interactive fiction community, but got a response back that it was “sleeping,” with not enough members then active to make a contribution; German IF fans had been around a few years earlier, but not much had been heard from them lately. There had been Russian IF, but no one in the English community knew who to talk to about it. And even for “active” communities, the term could be relative. The French IF group was a tiny cadre of fans; other text game niches were kept alive by only two or three members, circles where beggars could not afford to be choosers. Melitón had taken to writing harsh reviews of Spanish games purely to inure the community to criticism. One of his excoriating critiques ended nevertheless with a mostly rhetorical question: “¿Lo recomendaría entonces? Sí, claro, hay en realidad tan poco que interleer.”17 (So would I recommend it? Yes, of course, there’s really so little [Spanish IF] to play.)

Fear of the unknown has often kept creators working in different languages apart. Fear of not understanding, of looking foolish, of making mistakes, or—worst, for a creator in a fragile bubble—of being ignored. Yet as Melitón noted, perhaps this flavor of fear is one we ought to leave in the previous century. Google Translate and similar tools make it far easier than it once was to play interactive fiction in languages you don’t speak at all, if you’re willing to make a little effort to try; any amount of fluency makes the prospect much easier. And a bit of reaching out, as Nepstad showed, can go a long way. It’s ironic that a project celebrating the xenophobic Lovecraft helped, for a moment, to unite groups of fans with different backgrounds and cultures into common purpose. Maybe it should happen more often. Though it’s sometimes hard to remember, the common places of the internet were meant to help bring us together.


References

1) Aeron. 2007. “An Exhibit Of Unspeakable Things.” Monster Brains (blog). Nov 8, 2007. monsterbrains.blogspot.com/2007/11/exhibit-of-unspeakable-things-here-is.html | a Sep 23, 2021
2) “Club de Aventuras AD.” n.d. WikiCAAD. wiki.caad.es/CAAD | a Sep 23, 2021
3) Depresiv. 2007a. “Los juegos del Commonplace Book Project ya están disponibles.” Forum post. CAAD: Comunidad de Aventuras Conversacionales y Relatos Interactivos. Jun 19, 2007. foro.caad.es/viewtopic.php?t=1702 | a Sep 23, 2021
4) Depresiv. 2007b. “A History of Spanish IF.” SPAG #49, Aug 18, 2007. www.spagmag.org/archives/backissues/spag49.html | a Sep 23, 2021
5) Despresiv. 2008. “Lieux Communs” (review). SPAG #51, Apr 6, 2008. www.spagmag.org/archives/backissues/spag51.html#Lieux | a Sep 23, 2021
6) Dwalin. 2007. “El Museo de las Consciencias” (review). SPAC #51, July 2007. spac.caad.es/1/spac51.htm#a4 | a Sep 23, 2021
7) Eriorg. 2007. “A Timeline of the French IF Community.” SPAG #47, Jan 16, 2007. www.spagmag.org/archives/backissues/spag47.html | a Sep 23, 2021
8) Grimwald, Otto. 2007. “Maison d’Ailleurs : An exhibition of Unspeakable Things.” Forum post. IFictionFR: La fiction interactive francophone. Apr 4, 2007. ifiction.free.fr/taverne/viewtopic.php?p=&t=268 | a Sep 23, 2021
9) JB. 2007. “Projet Franco-Anglais / proposition de Peter Nepstad.” Forum post. IFictionFR: La fiction interactive francophone. Mar 20, 2007. ifiction.free.fr/taverne/viewtopic.php?p=&t=263 | a Sep 23, 2021
10) Labrande, Hugo. 2011. “Racontons Une Histoire Ensemble: History and Characteristics of French IF.” In IF Theory Reader, ed. Kevin Jackson-Mead and J. Robinson Wheeler. Boston, MA: >TRANSCRIPT ON PRESS.
11) Maison d’Ailleurs. 2007. “An Exhibition of Unspeakable Things: Works Inspired by H. P. Lovecraft’s Commonplace Book.” www.ailleurs.ch/uk/expo_d.php?id=love | s Apr 30, 2008
12) Mastodon. 2009. “El Museo de las Consciencias” (review). IFDB. Oct 7, 2009. ifdb.org/viewgame?id=oe62obqziewqgik&review=8943 | a Sep 23, 2021
13) Nepstad, Peter. 2007a. “ANNOUNCE: HP Lovecraft Commonplace Book Comp and Exhibit.” Usenet post, rec.games.int-fiction, Apr 9, 2007. groups.google.com/g/rec.games.int-fiction/c/1JeUOExZPNQ/m/FL28CfVCqY8J | a Sep 23, 2021
14) Nepstad, Peter. 2007b. “The Commonplace Book Project.” Illuminated Lantern. Apr 9, 2007. www.illuminatedlantern.com/if/games/lovecraft | s Dec 12, 2007
15) Nepstad, Peter. 2007c. “The H.P. Lovecraft Commonplace Book Project.” SPAG #50, Dec 3, 2007. www.sparkynet.com/spag/backissues/spag50.html | s Mar 25, 2008
16) Nepstad, Peter. 2008. “An Interview with Peter Nepstad.” Interview by Jimmy Maher. SPAG #51, Apr 6, 2008. www.sparkynet.com/spag/backissues/spag51.html#Nepstad | s Apr 11, 2008
17) Paz, Johan. 2010. “A Falta de Pan Mejor Repartir Tortas.” Hit It! (blog). Apr 12, 2010. golpealo.blogspot.com/2010/04/falta-de-pan-mejor-repartir-tortas.html | a Sep 23, 2021
18) Urbatain, Clérigo. 2007. “Entrevista ignomiosa.” SPAC #51, July 2007. spac.caad.es/1/spac51.htm#a4 | a Sep 23, 2021

