The 2010s


Not many communities of digital makers have had time to reach their fifth decade; many that have find themselves graying or stagnant. Interactive fiction at half a century, by contrast and perhaps surprisingly, was entering its most dynamic and exciting decade yet. On every front, text games were rapidly changing and evolving, with major shifts across the 2010s in audience, aesthetics, techniques, platforms, and even commercial prospects. The medium had never been more varied, never reached more players, never looked so beautiful, and never been more open to new kinds of games and game makers.

Perhaps the most visible trend across the decade was a move away from building interactive stories atop pedantic world simulations. In the classic text adventure mode, a world model simulating spaces, props, creatures, and turn-by-turn action is the foundation upon which stories are told—which can be frustrating, since it’s a hard foundation to properly build and often doesn’t have much to do with the stories performed atop it. Creators in the 2010s increasingly turned toward other kinds of foundations for interactive narratives, focused on elements like character, dramatic events, story structures, or the words themselves. Whether through curated chains of hypertext, finely tuned procedural content generators, sequencers for dramatic vignettes, or social models directing characters to behave in compelling ways, the overall thrust was toward systems that prioritized captivating stories over immersive simulations.

This sea change was nowhere more visible than in the rise of Twine, a hypertext authoring tool created by old-school parser author Chris Klimas. Curiously, there had never previously been a widely used tool in the game maker community for creating linked hypertextual stories. Commercial tools like Storyspace were often priced like professional software at multiple hundreds of dollars, limiting their audience; and as the 2010s approached, despite the ubiquity of the web as a platform, no tool for creating interlinked text for it had yet achieved a mainstream critical mass of work and community.

This changed with Twine, which was released in 2009 and exploded in popularity three years later as a movement of outsider writers found and claimed it. Bucking the general trend in computing toward increased complexity, Twine was radically simpler than earlier tools like Inform 1993—a major selling point for its advocates. Twine’s straightforwardness opened up interactive storytelling to new kinds of people without coding experience, limitless leisure time, or access to paid services like web hosting and professional tools. One study of Twine notes that even its documentation lays out a vision for a different kind of game scene, noting how it speaks to readers

	from an aesthetic angle first.… Rather than answering “how would you make a game with this?”, the official Twine reference manual focuses on answering “why would you make a game at all?” … Putting the emphasis on “writers,” rather than “developers” or “game-makers,” implies that creating this kind of interactive experience is not limited to those with technical ability.

By the fall of 2012, the tireless work of Twine advocates—posting tutorials and user guides; organizing jams and expos; writing raw and beautiful games and curating lists of their favorites by others—had nurtured a vibrant new IF community filled with voices that had rarely been heard in gaming before. These writers told stories about living in poverty, about queer love, about trauma and pain; but they also explored radical worlds in prose and new possibilities for design and interface. rat chaos [winter lake 2012] begins as a surreal sci-fi pastiche and veers into a poignantly real confessional. weird tape in the mail [adam dickinson 2012] is David Lynch by way of MS Paint and mall culture fever dreams. And Mastaba Snoopy [gods17 2012] takes the reader to a far-future nightmare where the galaxy has been subsumed by an alien god whose only knowledge of Earth life comes from a book of Peanuts comics, which it mindlessly emulates with mile-high, half-sentient Snoopies. Despite the many worlds text games had visited in the four decades prior, none had been quite like these.

Twine’s success arrived as the web had finally matured into a platform where complex programs could easily be run and shared. Like other new IF platforms from the 2010s—including Undum, StoryNexus, Squiffy, and Yarn—Twine was designed to build stories for the web and soon became a web app itself. Parser-based interactive fiction had moved to the web as well: JavaScript ports of the ancient Z-machine and other engines allowed them to run on web pages, leading to Play Online buttons replacing older links to download story files and interpreter programs. It had never been easier to play IF, though this ease of use came with a downside: online-only services could be distressingly ephemeral, shutting down and taking all their hosted content with them. 

While many authors continued making text games in traditional modes, they were increasingly joined throughout the decade by new communities with their own definitions of what an interactive story could be. Quality-based narrative, first popularized by King of Dragon Pass 1999 (and discussed in depth in the chapter on Fallen London 2009), presented players with a series of dramatic events or “storylets” rather than embedding them in an explorable spatial simulation. Games like Reigns [Devolver Digital 2016] combined this design with large pools of possible storylets to create dynamic stories that felt replayable and expansive in ways that other forms of interactive fiction could have difficulty capturing, and provided a more constant stream of drama than most slower-paced parser games could match.

Procedural generation techniques also proliferated in text games throughout the decade, from titles like Kerkerkruip [Victor Gijsbers 2011], which rendered an extremely randomized roguelike experience in fully realized prose, to Voyageur [Bruno Dias 2017], in which an infinite universe of textual generated worlds could be explored. JavaScript procedural text tools like Tracery or RiTa, now running in the same environment as web-based game engines, could often be integrated with them (with some amount of work), and many authors experimented with new ways that combinatorial text might make an interactive narrative more replayable, surprising, or responsive. Another thread of text games appeared with the rise of clicker games like A Dark Room [Doublespeak Games 2013], Candy Box! [aniwey 2013], Kittens Game [Bloodrizer 2014], and Universal Paperclips; these games, which often had sparse or no visuals, went back to gaming’s resource management roots and infused forty years of wisdom (some of it cursed) about how to make gameplay compelling and addictive, even without graphics or sounds.

Text games were also being read and played on a wider variety of platforms than ever before. People were increasingly interacting with handheld computers like the mobile phones in their pockets, rather than sitting at traditional desktops, and this brought literary games to spaces more traditionally suited for reading: couches, beds, vacations, commutes. E-book readers offered large screens optimized for reading text without eyestrain, and while manufacturers rarely offered developers enough access to support complex interactive text, some companies like Choice of Games experimented with ways to sell titles on platforms like Amazon’s Kindle. The tablet market took off with the 2010 debut of Apple’s iPad, providing another secondary screen for text game makers to target, as did smartwatches later in the decade (albeit with much smaller screens). Smart speakers even opened up new platforms for spoken word text games: titles like The Magic Door [The Magic Door LLC 2016], Yes Sire [Volley Inc 2018], and Detective Ivan [The Verse 2019] for Amazon’s Alexa were text-only games delivered by recorded or synthetic human voice.

New platforms opened up new audiences and new opportunities for commercial text games, largely dormant for the previous twenty years. Multiple companies focusing on text-heavy games thrived during the 2010s, including Choice of Games, inkle, Failbetter, and Pixelberry Studios. Text games became more visually sophisticated, in part due to efforts by these companies and others to make their products look polished and salable. Semipro amateurs too had new options for getting paid for their work, including crowdfunding sites like Kickstarter—Andrew Plotkin raised $31,000 in 2010 for his game Hadean Lands, and former Infocomer Bob Bates funded a new text game, Thaumistry, in 2017. Meanwhile, distribution services like Itch.io made it easy for independent creators to charge a fee in exchange for their games, and the subscription site Patreon gave IF authors the chance to receive steady payments from their most devoted fans. Some creators who had found success in the amateur text games world found their way to careers in the game industry during the decade, including old-school parser authors like Emily Short, Jon Ingold, Sam Barlow, Andrew Plotkin, and Kevin Wilson—mirroring the migration, a decade earlier, of amateur MUD designers into professional careers building graphical MMOs. For a time seen only as retro, the text game scene had increasingly garnered a reputation as an incubator for compelling ideas, innovative experiments, and pretrained talent.

In-person meetups for text game makers saw an upsurge in the 2010s, with events like WordPlay in Toronto, the People’s Republic of Interactive Fiction in Boston, and the NarraScope conference becoming recurring gatherings where word-driven games were shared and likeminded folks connected. Text games were also represented at more general game events like IndieCade and the Game Developers Conference in California, AdventureX in the UK, and larger entertainment gatherings like WorldCon, PAX, and South by Southwest, all of which featured games and speakers from the text game world across the decade. These events created more visibility for text games, strengthened community bonds, forged collaborations, and renewed commitments to ongoing projects. 

The COVID-19 pandemic, arriving at the start of the 2020s, would put a damper for a while on in-person gatherings. But that’s a story that will have to wait for The Next 50 Years of Text Games…


More Text Games from the 2010s

2010
Aotearoa (Matt Wigdahl, Inform 7). Children’s adventure and IF Comp winner set in a New Zealand populated by dinosaurs. The Blind House (Amanda Allen, Inform 7). A woman takes shelter in the house of a reclusive artist. Choice of Broadsides (Adam Strong-Morse et al., ChoiceScript). Command a career on the high seas in this early swashbuckling adventure from Choice of Games. Divis Mortis (Lynnea Dally, Inform 7). Zombie survival horror set in a creepy hospital. Dual Transform (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 7). Transform space with elemental forces in this metasemantic “one-room” game. Fragile Shells (Stephen Granade, Inform 7). Sci-fi escape room full of clever puzzles and strong worldbuilding. The Game Formerly Known as Hidden Nazi Mode (Victor Gijsbers, Inform 7). Thought experiment on authorial trust and content accessibility: how can you ever know for sure whether a nonlinear story contains objectionable content? God Wars II (Richard Woolcock et al., C++). PvP MUD known for coordinate-based movement with dynamically generated descriptions; new players got four square miles of terrain to customize with a “terraform” command. Hoist Sail for the Heliopause, and Home (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 7). Lyrical, well-crafted story about navigating a graceful solar sail ship through the stars. Hoosegow (Benjamin Collins-Sussman and Jack Welch, Inform 7). Escape from prison with your partner-in-crime in this well-characterized western. Leadlight (Wade Clarke, Eamon). Schoolgirl survival horror game written for the Apple II; has the rare distinction of being nominated twice in the same XYZZY category, Best Use of Medium. Rogue of the Multiverse (C.E.J. Pacian, TADS). Saurian scientist bribes a human prisoner to perform salvage missions amidst procedurally generated, open world settings. The Warbler’s Nest (Jason McIntosh, Inform 7). Beautifully written folklore horror about a mother unsure whether her child has been replaced by a changeling. 

2011
Andromeda Awakening (Marco Innocenti, Inform 7). This first entry in a multiauthor shared universe sci-fi series asks the player to save the day with nothing but a computer and a railway ticket. Beet the Devil (Carolyn VanEseltine, Inform 7). A god-fearing farmer descends into hell, armed with vegetables, to rescue his dog. Bonehead (Sean M. Shore, Inform 7). Step into the shoes of a historical baseball player about to make a career-ending mistake at a 1908 game. Cryptozookeeper (Robb Sherwin, Hugo). Collect DNA, create monsters, and make them fight in this winner of five XYZZY awards. Danse Nocturne (Joey Jones, Inform 7). Unusual game in blank verse where the player’s primary contribution is adverbs. Eternal (EndMaster, ChooseYourStory.com). Epic choice-based dark fantasy about a soldier with a chance to change the world; one of the most popular of all time on the web-based ChooseYourStory portal. Flexible Survival (Nuku Valente et al., Inform 7). Adults-only text RPG involving nanobots, furries, biowarfare, and lots of sex; possibly the largest game ever written in Inform 7 with over four million words of content. Kerkerkruip (Victor Gijsbers, Inform 7). Elaborate roguelike in prose, with dense procedural generation and emergent tactics and strategy. The Night Circus (Yasmeen Kahn, StoryNexus). Tie-in for the Erin Morgenstern novel of the same name; early example of Failbetter’s StoryNexus platform evolved from Fallen London. PataNoir (Simon Christiansen, Inform 7). Interacting with similes is a primary mechanic in this noir wordplay mystery. The Play (Dietrich Squinkifer, Undum). A director manages actors through a chaotic dress rehearsal. Six (Wade Clarke, Inform 7). A six-year-old chases down well-characterized friends in a birthday game of hide-and-seek. Taco Fiction (Ryan Veeder, Inform 7). IF Comp winner about a down-on-his-luck man who plans to rob a taco joint and uncovers a conspiracy.

2012
Bee (Emily Short, Varytale). Cyclical, moving character study of a homeschooled spelling bee champ. The Colder Light (Jon Ingold, Inform 7). Icy story of rune magic and survival; an experimental interface captures the best of both parser and choice-based games. Counterfeit Monkey (Emily Short, Inform 7). Change the text of your surroundings to escape Anglophone Atlantis in this wordplay game to end all wordplay games. CYBERQUEEN (Porpentine, Twine). Visceral science fiction nightmare about being torn apart and repurposed by a sadistic AI. CYPHER: Cyberpunk Text Adventure (Carlos and Javier Cabrera, Win). Commercially sold text game with audiovisual extras and physical feelies but a frustrating homegrown parser. Endless, Nameless (Adam Cadre, Inform 6). Neo-retro RPG with nested, interconnected realities; comments on IF as an artistic medium. Eurydice (Anonymous, Inform 7). A grieving modern man is transported to the underworld. First Draft of the Revolution (Emily Short and Liza Daly, inkle). Alter the text in a series of pivotal letters from a magic-infused eighteenth century. Katawa Shoujo (Four Leaf Studios, Ren’Py). Visual novel dating sim famous for intimate portrayals of disability. Mastaba Snoopy (gods17, Twine). Far in the future, an inconceivable alien creates a grotesque mockery of life based off misreading Peanuts comics. Olivia’s Orphanorium (Sam Kabo Ashwell, Inform 7). Tongue-in-cheek Victorian orphanage management simulator. rat chaos (Winter Lake, Twine). Personal and vulnerable story beneath a goofy surface. Samsara (Meg Jayanth, StoryNexus). Become a dreamwalker in a sumptuously written historical Bengal. Shuffling Around (Andrew Schulz, Inform 7). The first in a series using anagrams as a primary game mechanic. Winterstrike (Yoon Ha Lee, StoryNexus). Survive on a colony world after a mysterious apocalypse in this lyrical, limited-action storygame.

2013
Blackbar (Neven Mrgan and James Moore, iOS). Beat the censors at their own game in this unique mobile title from a dystopian future. Black Crown (Rob Sherman, StoryNexus). Uniquely dark and surreal story with gloriously unsettling writing about a grim institute and the poor souls who work there. Choice of the Deathless (Max Gladstone, ChoiceScript). Work at a demonic law firm to pay back your student loans in this “necromantic legal thriller” based on two previous novels. Codename Cygnus (Reactive Studios, iOS). Interactive radio drama; control a secret agent with voice commands. Coloratura (Lynnea Glasser, Inform 7). An alien creature manipulates the crew of a research vessel with color and song. CRY$TAL WARRIOR KE$HA (Porpentine, Twine). Sensory overload in a kind of textual music video; peak Porpentine. A Dark Room (Michael Townsend, web). Begins in a single room with one button to click, expands in scope and complexity until it reaches the stars. Depression Quest (Zoe Quinn et al., Twine). Actions gray out and become unselectable in this IndieCade-selected meditation on living with depression. Detritus (Mary Hamilton, Twine). Decide what to pack and what to leave behind through five key moves in your character’s life. Device 6 (Simogo, iPad). Surreal thriller that uses artfully positioned text to tell a kinetic story. Horse Master (Tom McHenry, Twine). That’s no horse in this body horror pageantry management sim. It’s election time in Pakistan: Go rich boy, go! (Jahanzaib Haque, Quest). Satirical adventure uses an obnoxious protagonist to highlight socioeconomic disparities and the perceived futility of change in Pakistan. a kiss (Dan Waber, Twine). Novel-length branching story about a single moment and all it connects to. my father’s long, long legs (Michael Lutz, Twine). Incredibly spooky, mostly linear horror piece with audio about obsession and loss of control. The Next Day (Jonathan Blask, Hugo). Gentle, sleepy slice-of-life mood piece reminisces over a night spent in conversation with a good friend. Queers in Love at the End of the World (Anna Anthropy, Twine). Choose how you spend your last ten seconds with someone you love. Save the Date (Chris Cornell, Ren’Py). Find a way to keep Felicia alive in this self-aware dinner date time loop. Steve Jackson’s Sorcery! (inkle, iOS). Popular adaptation of the acclaimed gamebook series, spawning three sequels. SLAMMED! (Paolo Chikiamco, ChoiceScript). Bodyslam and promo your way to the top as a face or heel in this choice-based pro-wrestling novel with an incredible amount of conditional content. To Be Or Not To Be (Ryan North, gamebook). Interactive retelling of Hamlet by creator of Dinosaur Comics; raised over half a million dollars on Kickstarter.

2014
AlethiCorp (Simon Christiansen, web). Satirical corporate espionage simulator with an interface emulating a noxious company web portal. Barbetween (Jason McIntosh, Seltani). Tiny game for Andrew Plotkin’s persistent textual virtual world; a place where each visitor can leave something for the next who arrives. Blood & Laurels (Emily Short, Versu). Roman epic; only full-length game to be released with the groundbreaking Versu engine. Candlesmoke (Caelyn Sandel and Carolyn VanEseltine, Twine). A policewoman investigates the disappearance of a man whose occult studies have surpassed his control. Coming Out Simulator 2014 (Nicky Case, Flash). An autobiographical game about coming out to conservative Asian parents. Creatures Such As We (Lynnea Glasser, ChoiceScript). Lunar tour guide explores questions of art, games, and human connection. Hadean Lands (Andrew Plotkin, Inform 7). An apprentice alchemist must master their craft to escape a crash landing; a masterclass of systemic puzzle design and a crowdfunding success story. Hunger Daemon (Sean M. Shore, Inform 7). Lovecraftian cult spoof in which you need to bring about the end of the world, but you’re also hungry. I’m Really Sorry About That Thing I Said When I Was Tired and/or Hungry (Dietrich Squinkifer, Twine). A genderqueer autobiographical tale about feeling misfit between several cultures. Jacqueline, Jungle Queen! (Steph Cherrywell, Quest). Escape a jungle as a 1930s reporter in this fun game with a unique approach to puzzles. Lime Ergot (Caleb Wilson, Inform 7). Dive through layers of hallucinations in this 2014 Halloween speed-IF entry. Tin Star (Allen Gies, ChoiceScript). Take on the Old West as a US marshal in this vast, choice-based western mystery. When acting as a particle / When acting as a wave (David T. Marchand, Twine). A link-driven story where there’s no text other than links. With Those We Love Alive (Porpentine, Twine). Winner of 2014’s XYZZY Award for Best Writing, this unique game asks players to draw on their skin. 

2015
Arcadia (Iain Pears, iOS). Companion piece to author’s novel of same name; switch between multiple story threads in a tale of alternate worlds and rituals of magic and science. Birdland (Brendan Patrick Hennessy, Twine). Dream birds infiltrate the real world in this queer fan-favorite summer camp drama. Caves of Qud (Freehold Games, Win/Mac). Roguelike with enormous procedural text engine describing objects, people, and histories of a strange future. Chlorophyll (Steph Cherrywell, Inform 7). Well-constructed puzzle explorer set on a space station populated by sentient, mobile plants. Collocations (Abraham Avnisan, Objective C). Uses the text of quantum physics debates between Bohr and Einstein to produce poetry on an iPad based on the reader’s movement and position. Emily is Away (Kyle Seeley, Win/Mac). Coming-of-age conversation game in a retro instant messenger interface. Hana Feels (Gavin Inglis, Twine). Through dialogue and journal entries, learn more about a central NPC’s experience of self-harm. Kuryokhin: Second Life (Michael Kurtov, Twine). An “afterlife metasimulator” loosely based on the life of an avant-garde composer. Laid Off from the Synesthesia Factory (Katherine Morayati, Inform 7). Uses keywords to explore a dystopian future in this artful experiment in interactive narrative structure. The Listeners (John Cayley, Alexa). Interactive literature for smart speakers, first shown in a gallery; what’s the message of this new medium? Map (Ade McT, Inform 7). An ordinary woman gets a fantastical chance to reshape her life. Mere Anarchy (Bruno Dias, Undum). Magical rebels fight against classist injustice. Midnight. Swordfight. (Chandler Groover, Inform 7). One-move game unfolds time to explore the past that led you to a fateful moment. SPY INTRIGUE (furkle, Twine). Absurd, wacky, and supercool espionage hijinks collide with addiction, trauma, and suicide in this dystopian dramedy thriller. Sub Rosa (Joey Jones and Melvin Rangasamy, Inform 7). Fun espionage puzzler in a unique, deep fantasy world.

2016
16 Ways to Kill a Vampire at McDonalds (Abigail Corfman, Twine). How many ways can you take out a vampire before it claims another victim? Cactus Blue Motel (Astrid Dalmady, Twine). High school grads make a mystical road trip stop in the desert. Cannonfire Concerto (Caleb Wilson, ChoiceScript). Nineteenth-century musician changes the course of history wielding their supernatural Genius across Europe in love and at war. Epitaph (Max Kreminski, web). Meddle in the development of procedurally generated alien civilizations in this text-only idle game. Four Sittings in a Sinking House (Bruno Dias, Blotter). Hold séances, interview ghosts by candlelight, and decide the fate of the thing in the basement. Hackmud (Drizzly Bear, Win/Mac). Multiplayer open-world hacking simulator; write your own malicious code and social engineer your way to victory. Honeysuckle (Cat Manning, Texture). Sorceress considers options for escaping her evil wizard husband. Inside the Facility (Arthur DiBianca, Inform 7). Attempt to map the entirety of a science fictional laboratory in this pared-down parser puzzler. Mystic Messenger (Cheritz Co., iOS). Wildly popular real-time episodic story app from South Korean developer; late-night IMs with anime boys. Open Sorcery (Abigail Corfman, Twine). Protect your network as a sentient Elemental Firewall. The Periwink (Jedediah Berry, Twine). Murderous groundskeeper guides their victim through a darkly bizarre garden. Reigns (Nerial, Devolver Digital, mobile). Play through generations of ill-fated rulers via a shuffled pack of random events; tight writing and many surprises. Superluminal Vagrant Twin (C.E.J. Pacian, Inform 7). Make five million credits to buy back your twin in this delightful open-world sci-fi trading sim. Tangaroa Deep (Astrid Dalmady, Twine). It’s up to the player how greedily and how deep they delve in their submersible. Worldsmith (Ade McT, Inform 7). Five-star, heavily simulationist commercial parser game about building a planet. Xylophoniad (Robin Johnson, Versificator). Comedic Greek mythology mash-up, co-winner of 2016’s Spring Thing.

2017
Absence of Law (Brian Rushton, Inform 7). Revive Dr. Law within 120 turns using limited three-letter inputs on a personified parser, DaedalOS. A Beauty Cold and Austere (Mike Spivey, Inform 7). XYZZY-nominated puzzles demonstrate mathematical concepts. Domestic Elementalism (fireisnormal, web). A witch fixes her malfunctioning house by altering objects’ associated elements. Eat Me (Chandler Groover, Inform 7). Fan favorite based around a single hunger-taming verb. Harmonia (Liza Daly, Windrift). Full-length demonstration of the author’s bespoke system for beautiful browser-based expanding hypertext; investigate a historical mystery at an obscure college. A Normal Lost Phone (Accidental Queens, mobile). Award-winning LGBT coming-of-age story presented entirely through a fictional cellphone interface. The Owl Consults (Cidney Hamilton et al., Inform 6). Direct criminals remotely as villainous freelance advisor The Owl. Thaumistry (Bob Bates, TADS). Kickstarted full-length magical adventure from a former Infocomer. Tuuli (Daurmith and Ruber Eaglenest, Inform 7). Spanish-language tale and translation about a Finnish witch; character study with beautiful writing. Voyageur (Bruno Dias, mobile). Explore procedurally generated planets and cultures in this textual interstellar journey. Warsim: The Realm of Aslona (Huw Millward, Win). Commercial text-based kingdom simulator with heavy randomized elements. Will Not Let Me Go (Stephen Granade, Twine). Slice-of-life story about living with Alzheimer’s. The Wizard Sniffer (Buster Hudson, Inform 7). An ordinary pig sniffs out an evil wizard in this fantasy comedy, winner of IF Comp 2017.

2018
Alias ‘The Magpie’ (J.J. Guest, Inform 7). Gentleman thief steals a priceless Egyptian scarab in this interactive Wodehousian farce. Animalia (Ian Michael Waddell, Twine). A cast of forest animals puppeteers a replica of a human child; 2018 XYZZY for Best Writing and Best NPCs. Bi Lines (Naomi “Bez” Norbez, Twine). Closeted journalist medium is haunted by ghostly sexual assault. Bogeyman (Elizabeth Smyth, Twine). Terrible things happen to children kidnapped by the bogeyman; winner of multiple XYZZY Awards. Cannery Vale (Hanon Ondricek, AXMA Story Maker). Horror mystery switches perspectives between a novel’s characters and its author. Cragne Manor (Ryan Veeder, Jenni Polodna et al., Inform 7). Massive haunted house collaboration by eighty-four authors, each contributing one room of this tribute to IF classic Anchorhead. The Ghost of You (Noodletub Games, Win). Choice-based hypertext with half a million words; Japanese yuri horror set at a 1950s symphony hall. Human Errors (Katherine Morayati, Twine). Close out bug reports for mood regulation tech. I.A.G. Alpha (Serhii Mozhaiskyi, INSTEAD). Games within games in this metapuzzler from a Russian author. The Master of the Land (Pseudavid, Twine). Audacious hypertext world simulation in a nineteenth-century fantasy story. Six Ages: Ride Like the Wind (A Sharp, iOS). Manage a fantasy kingdom through vignettes and decisions in this sequel to storylet pioneer King of Dragon Pass 1999. Six Silver Bullets (William Dooling, ADRIFT). Mind-wiped secret agent armed with six shots must untangle a web of intrigue before it’s too late. The Tower (Freya Campbell, Twine). Unsettling story of dreams, identity, and Tarot; first of a short trilogy with The House of God and The Horizon. What Isn’t Saved ()will be lost) (Cat Manning, Twine). Choose which memories of an ex to save in this IndieCade selected sci-fi rumination on death and remembrance.

2019
American Election (Greg Buchanan, ink). Dark, acclaimed tale of the campaign assistant for a sociopathic narcissist. Bury me, my Love (The Pixel Hunt, mobile). Text a Syrian refugee during her dangerous journey to a new home. Chuk and the Arena (Agnieszka Trzaska, Twine). Gladiatorial adventure puzzler wherein a scrawny alien seeks to win his planet’s moon back from an evil emperor. Crème de la Crème (Hannah Powell-Smith, ChoiceScript). Finishing school romance tied for two XYZZYs: Best Game and Best Writing. Heretic’s Hope (G.C. Baccaris, Twine). The last living human navigates their new role as pontiff to an alien, insectoid civilization. Limerick Heist (Pace Smith, Twine). Choice-based bank heist told entirely in limerick form. Lionkiller (Sisi Jiang, Twine). Less Disneyfied retelling of the Mulan story from a nonbinary Chinese designer. Ord (Mujo Games, Win/Mac). Minimalist commercial text game told in one-word sentences. Ryan Veeder’s Authentic Fly Fishing (Ryan Veeder, Inform 7). Open-world fly fishing simulator plays out in real time over long periods, hidden depths, and thicker plots. Skybreak! (William Dooling, ADRIFT). Open-world, science fantasy space sim with varying goals set during character creation; Winner of IF Comp 2019’s Golden Banana of Discord. Sunless Skies (Failbetter Games, Win/Mac). Explore the strange skies above Fallen London in this text-heavy narrative roguelike. Turandot (Victor Gijsbers, ChoiceScript). A profligate rake would do anything for one princess. Your Future Self (Contortionist Games, Win/Mac). Time loop conversations and future mistakes on a glitchy, flickering screen. Zozzled (Steph Cherrywell, Inform 7). A flapper exorcises a haunted hotel speakeasy by drinking spirits; IF Comp winner.

2020
Blaseball (The Game Band, web). Night Vale meets baseball simulator in this live procgen web experiment that amassed an obsessive fan base. Blow Your House Down (Bill Ingersoll, ChooseYourStory.com). Al Flansburgh is stuck in a cabin during a storm when two strangers show up. The Cursed Painting (Wanderword, Alexa). Audio-only fantasy roleplaying game for smart speaker. Doppeljobs (Lei, ink). Young doppelganger provides imitation on demand. The Impossible Bottle (Linus Åkesson, Dialog). A little girl lives and plays in a magically recursive dollhouse; first place tie in IF Comp. Jolly Good: Cakes and Ale (Kreg Segall, ChoiceScript). Very British comedy with over a million words; winner of XYZZYs for Best Writing, Setting, and NPCs. Present Quest (Errol Elumir, Adventuron). Increasingly forgetful office worker faces puzzles trying to buy his wife a Christmas present. A Rope of Chalk (Ryan Veeder, Inform 7). Viewpoints of an art competition drugged en masse. Stuff of Legend (Lance Campbell, Inform 7). Village idiot sets out to become a knight; a comedy of errors. Tavern Crawler (Josh Labelle, Twine). From dungeon crawl to bar crawl, the real adventures start after the dragon in this “screwball noir fantasy” RPG, tied for first place in IF Comp. Tombs & Mummies (Matthew Warner, Quest). Escape early interment in a pharaoh’s hazardous tomb.