KILLED UNTIL DEAD
US Gold, 1987

CASSETTE INLAY
As Hercule Holmes, the world's greatest detective, you are faced with the
toughest challenge of your career.
The world's finest murder mystery writers are gathered at the Gargoyle Hotel
for a festival of murder and mayhem. They're known as the Midnight Murder Club
aka the Red Herring Club and you must stop them before they pull off their
dirty deeds. This is the ultimate challenge to your sleuthing skills. You must
uphold the family honour and discover, BEFORE the scheduled murder, the
identities of the Killer and his/her intended victim. And that's not all. You
must also correctly identify the murder weapon and where the crime will take
place.
And finally, you must figure out the murder motive.
But beware! If you don't have your facts straight when you make your
accusation, you become the intended victim.
The clock starts at Noon. You've got exactly 12 hours to PREVENT the murder.
Here's how ...

GETTING STARTED
SPECTRUM CASS:
Type LOAD"" and press ENTER. Press PLAY on the cassette recorder.

Step 1
Check "Profiles". Get to know the suspects. Watch for possible connections,
antagonisms and murder motives. Don't bother to take notes because you can
return to profiles anytime.

Step 2
BREAK-INS
Highlight "Break-In". Answer mystery trivia questions. If you are wrong, come
back to the room 1O minutes later after the security guard has left. Clues in
each room will be filed in your "Notes".

Collect as many clues and meeting notes as possible. Set your tape recorder to
record meetings or attend them: valuable clues will be found in these meetings.
Refer to them frequently as you piece the puzzle together.

Best time for Break-Ins is generally between noon and four p.m. - after that,
suspects returo to their rooms from their various outings and intrigues.

Step 3
TAPE/MONITOR
Eavesdrop with "Tape". Record meetivgs because every clue
is essential in stopping the murder. See data for Tape Recording
details. All taped information can be accessed through Play.
Information in Monitor meetings cannot be kept - you must
see the meeting as it happens.

Step 4
INTERROGATION
First check your Break-In notes so you can pose your first
question.

Now BREAK DOWN the suspects.

They will get more and more nervous as you ask pointed questions based on the
clues you've gathered. If you can rattle them, the suspects will blurt out
vital information. Watch their expressions change as you close in on the
solution. Try and get a second suspect to substantiate information you've
gathered.

For instance, if you're convinced that Sydney is planning to kill Agatha, call
Mike and ask him what he knows about Sydney as killer. When Mike gets vervous,
then ask about Agatha as victim. He'll get more rattled. Now close in for the
kill by asking Mike about the weapon and the location. If you've done your
homework, Mike's answer to your fourth question will be extremely valuable,
i.e. 'If Sydney's the killer, the murder will happen in the Hall.'

If you can get a second character to collaborate this information, you're
almost ready to call Mike to make an accusation. All you need is the motive.
Check your Break-In Notes and work out the possible motive.

Try to get suspects to corroborate your suspicions. Ask tough questions, make
suspects breakdown. As they get more nervous, suspects reveal more info. Study
their expressions and the text responses.

All interrogation information will be plugged into your 'Notes'.

DETAILED DOCUMENTATION

Your desk has four tools, essential in stopping the Midnight Murders:
- FILES - TELEPHONE
- NOTES - SURVEILLANCE

To use these features, move finger (joystick left/right) over the desired tool,
then press fire button.

Play sequence is as follows: Move your finger to the extreme right, press fire
button and open...

1. FILES
Profile notes contain key information about possible murder motives. Read
carefully and look for connections between characters, i.e. Agatha Maypole is a
teetotaller but Sydney Meanstreet drinks anything wet.

2. SURVEILLANCE SCREEN
"MONITOR"
Your hidden surveillance camera allows you to check the whereabouts of each
suspect. Highlight and press fire button to explore the Gargoyle Arms - after
you've gathered clues (see Break-In below).

"BREAK-IN"
If any one of the suspect's rooms is empty, try a Break-In. Each of their rooms
contain crucial clues. These cluesand 'meeting' notes are pieces of the puzzle.
You must successfully Break-In and get the essential information before you can
piece together the mystery. Further, you must have 'Break-In' clues before you
are able to interrogate that particular suspect. A successful Break-In depends
on your ability to answer a mystery trivia question. Select your choice by
moving joystick up and down. Highlight and press fire button.

If you are correct, Break-In clues will be revealed (and automatically included
in your Notes).

If mistaken, the security guard challenges you and stands guard for 10 minutes
of game time. Remember the question and come back later.

Also return later if the room is occupied.

Among the clues are notes containing times for planned meetings between
suspects. These are essential to the puzzle because suspects reveal themselves
at some of these encounters. To complicate matters, the meetings often take
place simultanenusly. That's where your trusty hidden camera and bugging device
come in handy. They'll help you figure out the time and whereabouts of various
meetings.

"TAPE"
You'll want to use your tape recorder to record meetings that you think you
will not be able to monitor. Your hectic schedule may interfere with your
snooping time, or perhaps those sneaky scribes have scheduled two meetings at
the same time. The tape recorder has four buttons and three 'presets'. The
buttons are: Rewind, Play, Fast Forward, Stop. To use the tape recorder you
MUST set some record preset times. These are instructions to your tape recorder
telling it which room to record and the time frame you've selected.

To set a time:
1.	Move the white highlight bar (joystick up/down/left/right) to the room name
    on the first preset line.
2.	Press the Fire Button. The name will turn yellow (C64), highlight
    (Spectrum/Amstrad). Now move the joystick up/down to cycle through all the
    room names, stopping at the one you would like to record.
3.	Press the Fire Button again - the name will return to white (C64), normal
    (Spectrum/Amstrad).
4.	Now move the highlight bar to the 'from time' and repeat the procedure.
    Press the fire button, move the joystIck up and down to pick the time (note
    you cannot record past events) and press the fire button to finish.
5.  Using the same procedure, set the 'to time'.
6.  Now move the bar to the set instruction and press the fire button. This
    final step will instruct the tape recorder to enter this preset and to
    record the room between the two times you have entered.

You have only three presets so use them carefully.
After a preset has been recorded, it will be free again.

To play back:
1.  Hit Rewind.
2.	Hit the Play button. The monitor will now show you the time of the
    recording and the events. If you want to stop the tape, just press the stop
    button.

NB: To exit the tape function, press the Stop button.

Occasionally your phone will ring. Return to your desk immediately and answer
the call. It might be a valuable clue (and it will also be automatically
entered into your 'Notes'.) Meanwhile, try some more Break-Ins and study your
'Notes' to see how the plot is unravelling. Once you've successfully broken
into the suspect's rooms, eavesdropped on their meetings and answered phone
calls, your 'Notes' should be giving you a good feel for the plot.

Now it's time for interrogation...

3. TELEPHONE

The object here is to get a suspect to break down to confess any information
he/she has about the Midnight Murder. Remember, you must have successfully
broken into that suspect's room in order to proceed with the interrogation,
otherwise they refuse to co-operate - 'You're guessing Holmes' - and if you try
and callback, their phone will be busy for 10 game minutes.

Move your finger to the telephone and press the fire button.
Highlight a suspect's name and press fire button.

NB: Go after the character you consider most likely to commit the murder. If
you've done your sleuthing, you can ask specific questions about the intended
victim, weapon and location. If you're right, the suspect will break down and
offer valuable information that will go into your 'Notes'.

Once they answer your call, you'll see four questions. One of the questions
correctly refers to something you've seen - if you've successfully broken into
that person's room. If correct, suspect responds: "You've been spying on me."
If wrong, suspect responds: "You're guessing Holmes." Then they hung up.

By getting the correct question, you force the suspect to answer specific
questions about the Murderer, Victim, Location and Weapon. Highlight the
question that will likely confirm your suspicions.

Now you're presented with a specific name. Highlight the name and the suspect
will respond with a weak response, i.e 'If Claudia is the killer, then Agatha
won't be the victim.'

Important: Watch for a change in expression. If the suspect appears upset or
rattled, follow up with another question based on the clues you've compiled.

As the suspects become increasingly nervous, they reveal more information. If
they appear calm, you're headed up the wrong trail.

Each response will be automatically plugged into your 'Phone Notes'.

Once you've gained enough information to make an accusation, phone the suspect,
highlight 'I wish to confront you' line and make your accusation.

If you're correct the suspect will reply 'Congratulations. But you'll never
prove it without a motive.'

At this point four motives will appear on the screen. Select one. If correct,
the suspect willl keel over and you've won the game. If wrong, the suspect will
hang up, your office window will open, a gun will appear and you're dead meat.

4. NOTES
There are four 'Notes' sections:
- PHONE NOTES
- BREAK IN NOTES
- MONITOR NOTES
- CALL NOTES

Phone Notes are a record of what you have learned during your interrogations.
You'll notice that the suspects tend to give two kinds of responses:

Weak, i.e.:
'If Agatha is the killer, don't worry about the gun.'
Strong, i.e:
'If Agatha is the killer, the gun will be the weapon.

NB: As you 'break down' a suspect with touchy questions, they will go from weak
responses to strong responses - keep on the pressure with questions "based on
information you've gathered."

The phone responses are automatically stored in your notes under five headings:

Source  Murderer  Victim  Weapon  Room

The Source is the person who gave you the clue. Each clue has
two parts. If they're shown in...

RED (C64), non-highlighted (Spectrum/Amstrad) - it means that the clue was weak.
YELLOW (C64), highlighted (Spectrum/Amstrad) - means that the clue was strong.
You can SORT or DELETE clues you have collected.

To sort clues:
1.  Press the fire button while the highlight bar is over SORT.

2.  Select which of the five categories you would like to have clues sorted
    under, using the joystick left/right to move the highlight bar and press
    the fire button.

Clues that do not have an element in the sort category will not be displayed.
To return all the clues to the screen, simply sort by Source.

To delete clues, select DELETE by:
1.  Moving the highlight bar over the word DELETE.
2.  Pressing the fire button (C64). A bar will appear (Spectrum/Amstrad).
3.  Scroll up or down until the clue you want to delete is highlighted and
    press the firebutton (C64). Move the bar up and down to select the clue to
    delete. Then press fire button (Spectrum/Amstrad).