                              War of the Lance
                              ================


                              Table of Contents
                              -----------------
                   INTRODUCTION...........................1
                   OBJECTIVE..............................1
                   GETTING STARTED........................1
                   APPLE INSTRUCTIONS.....................2
                   COMMODORE 64/128 INSTRUCTIONS..........2
                   SETTING UP THE GAME....................2
                   GAME PLAY..............................3
                   MESSAGE................................3
                   QUEST PHASE............................3
                   CHAMPION STATUS........................5
                   REINFORCEMENTS/REPLACEMENTS PHASE......5
                   SUBVERSION PHASE.......................6
                   DIPLOMATIC PHASE.......................6
                   COUNTRY STATUS.........................8
                   VICTORY PHASE..........................8
                   INITIATIVE PHASE.......................8
                   RECOVER PHASE..........................8
                   MOVEMENT PHASE.........................8
                   COMBAT PHASE..........................14
                   APPENDIX..............................18


INTRODUCTION
============

Welcome to SSI's ADVANCED DUNGEONS AND DRAGONS computer product, War of the
Lance, a DRAGONLANCE strategic fantasy wargame.  The War of the Lance has its
origins in the great cataclysm, where the empires of old were shattered, and
dragons were banished for more than a millennium.  During these years the
nations have grown lax.  Those who were once allies have fallen to petty
bickering and politicking amongst themselves.  But now, Takhisis, the Queen of
Darkness, has brought evil dragons back from exile, and entered into an
unnatural union with the vile Highlord alliance of Neraka.  Highlord
dragonarmies with their evil Draconian soldiers cast covetous eyes at all of
Ansalon.  With each new dawn their power and greed cast shadows further across
the lands of man, elf, dwarf, and kender.  Diplomats travel to forge treaties
and add to the might of Highlord legions.  Those not swayed by reason are
persuaded by force.  One day soon dragonarmies will pour forth form their
strongholds in the Khalkis Mountains to sweep the land clean of all who dare
oppose...

The sound of war drums and marching soldiers echoes across the land.  Highlord
has the initiative and many flock to their banner in hopes of quick victory
and and riches.  The forces of Whitestone are slow to see the threat and
scramble to overcome the first, crushing onslaught of the evil armies.  Can
they pull the isolated lands together in a Whitestone alliance, before the
dragonarmies swoop down from Neraka?  Will the dragonarmies of Highlord defeat
the mustering Whitestone forces before they form a strong alliance and uncover
the secrets of ancient magic that will let them counter the evil dragons?

The guantlet is dropped.  Are you, my lord commander, prepared for the
challenge?


OBJECTIVE
=========

War of the Lance is a one or two player game, allowing you to choose sides
against another human player or to command Whitestone (the forces of good)
against the computer.  The full campaign lasts for 6 game years (30 turns).
Players may engage in battles to conquer enemy countries or attempt to gain
alliances by sending diplomats.  While players control their armies, brave
champions quest for magic that will make your armies more powerful.  You may
send wounded champions to seek aid, attempt daring prison breaks for captured
champions or send troops to hinder enemy quests.

War of the Lance may be won in two different ways.  A player may win strictly
on points.  Points are gained by making alliances, conquering nations and
destroying enemy troops.  The other way to win is for one side to destroy the
central nation(s) of the other.  The Whitestone player will automatically win
if he can capture the capital of Neraka and the tower to the northwest.
Likewise the Highlord player will win an immediate victory if the can conquer
the four Knight countries (Solanthus, Caergoth, Gunthar, and Northern Ergoth)
plus the Clerist Tower near Planthus.


GETTING STARTED
===============

You should make a copy of your War of the Lance game disk for your own use.

To make backups consult your computer/disk drive manual or use any commercial
bit copier.  To load the program on your computer, use the following
instructions or consult the Data Card that came with your game.,

War of the Lance has no copy protection on the disk, but to make sure you have
a legitimate copy of the game there is a verification questions that requires
you to give information from this manual.


APPLE INSTRUCTIONS:
===================

Loading:
--------
Step 1: To start the game insert your copy of the game disk, label side up, in
Drive #1 and turn on the machine.  The game will boot automatically.

Step 2: Answer the verification question with the requested information from
this manual.

Step 3: Select the number corresponding to your machine configuration from the
list on the screen.

Step 4: Select NEW or SAVED game.

Keyboard:
---------
To move the cursor use either the cursor controls or the following keys:

    U I O    7 8 9
    J   K    4   6
    N M ,    1 2 3

When instructed to select something press the <SPACE> bar.


COMMODORE 64/128 INSTRUCTIONS
=============================

Loading:
--------
Step 1: To start the game plug the joystick into port #2 and insert your copy
of the game disk in the disk drive and type:  LOAD "*",8

Step 2: Hit the RETURN key and when the screen says READY, type: RUN

Step 3: Answer the verification question with the requested information from
this manual.

Step 4: Select the number corresponding to your machine configuration from the
list on the screen.

Step 5: Select NEW or SAVED game.

Joystick and Keyboard:
----------------------
To move the cursor use the joystick, cursor keys or the following keys:

    U I O
    J   K
    N M ,

Whn instructed to select something press the joystick fire button or hit the
<SPACE> bar.


Saving Games:
-------------
You may save the game to a seperate disk on either machine at any time during
the Movement Phase.  When you select the SAVE option a menu will come up that
will allow you to format save disks, catalog disks, save games, and erase old
games.



SETTING UP THE GAME
===================

After the verificatio question, system setup, andtitle screens, you will come
to an opening menu with the following options:

    OPENING MENU
    A) HIGHLORD              HUMAN      COMPUTER
    B) GAME SELECTION        SCENARIO   CAMPAIGN
    C) LEVEL OF PLAY         1 2 3 4 5
    D) STRENGTH-HL           1 2 3 4 5
    E) STRENGTH-WS           1 2 3 4 5
    F) REPLACEMENTS-HL       1 2 3 4 5
    G) REPLACEMENTS-WS       1 2 3 4 5
    H) ALLIANCE LEVEL        1 2 3 4 5
    I) PLAY GAME

 A) Select human or computer player foe Highlord.  If you select a computer
    opponent it is best to select the SCENARIO game option, as both sides will
    start with allies and troops.

 B) The CAMPAIGN game starts at the very beginning of the War of the Lance
    with only Neraka allied to Highlord, and Whitestone having no allies.  The
    SCENARIO option begins further into the war and both sides have allies and
    several nations have already been conquered by Highlord.

 C) This option weights the combat effectiveness of each army in favor of one
    player or the other.  A value of 1 is a major Whitestone advantage, a
    value of 5 favors Highlord, 3 is balanced for each player.

D-E) These options affect what percentage of full strength each player's units
     start at. 1=60%, 2=80%, 3=100%, 4=120%, 5=120%

F-G) These options adjust the number of replacements for lost units each
     player will receive (see Replacement Phase).

 H) This option adjusts alliance percentage for neutral countries,  The higher
    the number, the higher the probability of alliance (see Alliance Section).


GAME PLAY:
==========

Each game turn consists of the following phases:

     Message
     Highlord Quest Phase
     Highlord Champion Phase
     Highlord Reinforcements/Replacements
     Highlord Subversion Phase
     Highlord Diplomatic Phase
     Whitestone Quest Phase
     Whitestone Champion Phase
     Whitestone Reinforcements/Replacements
     Whitestone Subversion Phase
     Whitestone Diplomatic Phase
     Country Status
     Victory Display
     Initiative Phase
     Recovery Phase
     Player 1 Movement Phase
     Player 1 Combat Phase
     Player 2 Movement Phase
     Player 2 Combat Phase


MESSAGE:
========

The first message screen will list any nations conquered on the previous turn.
The second message screen gives both players information about the war,
results from the quests (see Quest Phase), and notification of any magic
treasures found.


QUEST PHASE
===========

As Highlord and Whitestone vie for political alliances and military victories,
brave champions for both sides quest for powerful magic artifacts that will
help turn the tide in their favor.  Quests are dangerous undertakings with
potential for both glory and death.

Your champions are automatically on a quest.  In this phase you are notified
if any of your quest party have been detected by enemy troops or if nay are
wounded, captured, or killed.  You may decide whether to rescue captured
champions, rest the wounded and so on.  The following menus explain all of
your options:

If a member of the quest is injured the following menu bar will appear:

        REST PARTY   WITHDRAW   SEEK AID

  Rest Party: The whole party will continue the quest at a slower pace
              until the wounded champion has recovered.  This will cause a
              large delaying the completion of the mission.

   Withdraw:  Remove wounded member from the quest.  This will cause a small
              delay in the quest, and the wounded champion will recover at a
              fair rate.

    Seek Aid: The wounded champion will leave the quest to seek medical aid.
              The quest will suffer a small delay, but the champion will
              recover quickly. Champions seeking aid risk the danger of being
              captured or killed if they are detected by the enemy.

If a champion is still wounded and not currently on a quest, the following
menu will appear:

        REST   SEEK AID    REJOIN

        Rest: The wounded champion will continue to rest and not rejoin the
              quest.

    Seek Aid: Seek medical aid for the wounded party member.  The wound will
              heal quickly, but the champion risks discovery and capture or
              death.

      Rejoin: Return wounded champion to quest.  The champion will recover
              very slowly and may die if injured again.

If a champion is captured by the enemy, the following menu will appear:

        ESCAPE   REMAIN   RESCUE

      Escape: The captured champion may attempt to escape.  Champions risk
              failure, wounding or even death in escape attempts.

      Remain: Leave the champion in prison for the present.

      Rescue: Divert the quest party to attempt a rescue.  Any member of the
              rescuing party may be captured, wounded or killed.  Rescues
              delay the completion of the quest.

Whenever a champion is healed or rescued, he will automatically rejoin the
quest.  When champions are removed from the quest, through capture, wounding
or death, progress is slowed.

MAGIC ITEMS:
------------
The treasures your champions seek are varied and powerful.  Some artifacts are
one of a kind, some are required to make others, some aren't really even
magic.

 Gnomish Technology:  The gnomish machines, such as catapults, ballistas, and
 other engines of war, are a mixed blessing.  Sometimes they will double
 combat effectiveness for a stack of units that have been outfitted with them.
 Sometimes, however, they will backfire and halve combat strength.  Only
 Whitestone will receive gnomish technology.

 Dragon Orbs:  These artifacts have the power to turn enemy dragons from a
 battle.  The effect is somewhat random, and on occasion they will drive
 friendly dragons from the field too.  both sides can get orbs.

 Medallion of Faith:  The armies of good may receive a number of these holy
 relics.  The medallions will inspire all friendly units and increase their
 combat strength.

 Minotaur Banner:  Only units from the Minotaur nations  (Mithas and Kothas)
 will receive these.  The banners will inspire and strengthen all friendly
 units in a battle.  Either side may ally with the Minotaur nations and
 receive banners.  Banners may not be transferred.

 Dragon Lord Armor:  The Nerakan units (mercenary units, leaders, and
 Draconians) may receive this eldritch armor.  The armor helps to protect
 units from damage, and decreases the effect of enemy dragon attacks.  Armor
 is automatically issued to all appropriate units and may not e transferred.

 Solamnic Knight Armor:  These are the most potent of all magic artifacts and
 may only be made by Whitestone.   The lances will double combat strength of
 friendly units, negate the special combat bonus of enemy dragons, and may
 kill enemy dragon troops.  However, several other items must be found first:

   The Silver Arm of Ergoth:  The arm was created by good dragons, men, elves,
   and dwarves during the first dragon war, and is necessary for the creation
   of dragonlances.

   The Hammer of Kharas:  The hammer is a mighty magical artifact that once
   belonged to the great dwarven champion, Kharas, and is required to properly
   forge dragonlances.

   Pure Dragon Metal:  The smelting process to produce these ingots has been
   forgotten for many ages.  Only this metal will produce a dragonlance that
   shall strike true.

In the movement phase section you will find directions for transferring items
from one unit to another.  Items required to make dragonlances will not e
issued to units.  These items are found and delivered to the smiths that will
produce the lances for Whitestone troops.

CHAMPION STATUS:

The champion status screen will list all of your champions and whether they
are wounded, captured or killed, and if they are on the quest currently.  The
number to the right of the champion's name is that champion's quality rating.
The higher the number the better the champion.  Higher quality champions have
more impact on the quest, and have a greater chance of escaping if captured.


REINFORCEMENTS/REPLACEMENT PHASE:
=================================

Reinforcements:
---------------
    Reinforcements are units not associated wilt particular nations that will
    flock to the banners of each alliance.  The following is a list of the
    units that may become activated in this phase and a description of each:

      Draconians:  These inhuman, part dragon, warriors are the product of
      evil spells performed upon the eggs of good dragons.  As long as there
      is room in or around Neraka capital, Highlord will receive 19 units of
      Draconian reinforcements (one per turn).  Draconian units receive
      replacements.

      Wizards:  Wizards will join both armies.  They have the ability to
      travel fantastic distances each turn, and boost all friendly units a
      great deal in their combat strength.

      Soth Infantry:  As part of his unholy alliance with Highlord, Lord Soth
      will give 2 units of fierce zombie warriors.  These units will receive
      no replacements.

      Clerist Tower Knights:  The Solamnic Knights in the Clerist Tower near
      Palanthus will join Whitestone as soon as one of the Knight countries
      ally. These units receive no replacements.

      Citadels:  Citadels are flying fortress cities that join Highlord late
      in the game.  Citadels may only e attacked by flying units (dragons,
      griffons, and pegasi).  They may carry up to 3 infantry or cavalry plus
      leaders and wizards for a total of 10 units.

      Good Dragons:  After being banished from Ansolon for more than a thousand
      years, these dragons will return to fight for the forces of good after
      they have heard the fate of their precious eggs- if Whitestone can
      survive long enough.

   When you get reinforcements, you will see where they enter on the map.

Replacements:
-------------
   After reinforcements, infantry, cavalry, and fleet units will receive a
   small number of replacements.  Only Draconians and units from allied,
   nonconquered, countries will receive replacements.  The number of
   replacements is somewhat random, and units in cities, ports, forts, and
   towers will receive a higher number of replacements.


SUBVERSION PHASE:
=================

As both sides quest for magic, so do the adversaries strive to slow one
another. In this phase troops may e allocated to interfere with the enemy
quest.  You will see a screen showing all of the units you currently have on
patrol to subvert the enemy quest.  You may add more units to patrol, or
remove them to e used for battle and conquest.  Only units from allied nations
may be put on subversion duty (no wizards, Soth infantry, etc), and more than
5 or 6 units will not add to the effectiveness of the effort.  The following
menu controls all of your options:

        ADD    REMOVE   MAP   EXIT

         Add: Select a unit to add to subversion duty.  This option will take
              you to another menu that will allow you to get a unit from the
              map.

      Remove: Return a unit to normal duty.  Units removed from subversion
              duty may only return to a city, port city, fortress or tower in
              their home nation. After selecting this option, move the cursor
              to the desired unit and select it from the subversion screen.

         Map: Go to the map.

        Exit: Exit subversion phase.

After selecting ADD, you will go to the map and the following menu will
appear:

        CURSOR   GET   EXIT

      Cursor: Move the cursor around the map.

         Get: Get a unit from the square the cursor is now on.  If there is
              more than one unit in the square, you will be able to select the
              one you want.

        Exit: Return to previous menu.

After you GET a unit, the following menu will appear:

        ADD   EXIT

         Add: Add the selected unit to suervsion patrol.

        Exit: Return to the Subversion Phase menu.

If you select REMOVE, you will go to the map and the following menu will
appear:

        CURSOR   PLACE   EXIT

      Cursor: Move the cursor around the map.

       Place: Return the unit to the square under the cursor.

        Exit: Return to previous menu.


DIPLOMATIC PHASE:
=================

Skill in the art of war will get you only so far, in the phase you must send
forth your diplomats to forge treaties and gain the allies that will swell the
numbers of your armies.

Alliance:
---------
The first part of the diplomatic phase is alliance.  On the alliance screen
you will see a list of neutral nations, each of which will be followed by
numbers and a letter like this:

        GUNTHAR 1 M 18

The first number is the allegiance of the nation.  These numbers go from 1 to 9.
Whitestone aligned nations have low numbers.  The nations in the middle may e
swayed to either side by your diplomats.  The letter following the number
(Low, Medium, High) is the alliance level.  The alliance level tells you a
little more about how that nation feels about alliance with your side.  An L
alliance is not as good as an M which in turn is less than an H in any given
alliance range.  The last column of numbers is the total number of diplomat
rating points you have sent to that country.  To select a country and attempt
alliance use the menu ar on the bottom of the screen:

        COUNTRY   ALLY   MAP   EXIT

     Country: This allows you to select a neutral country for an alliance
              attempt.

        Ally: Attempt to create an alliance with the selected country.  When
              you successfully ally with a nation, all of it's troops are at
              your disposal. If you are successful you will e allowed to
              deploy the troops of your new ally (see Deploying Units).

         Map: Allows you to move around the map.

        Exit: Go to the diplomatic menu.

Negotiating and Declaration of War:
-----------------------------------
After attempting to ally with a nation it is time to send diplomats to the
capitals of neutral nations.  The diplomats screen shows a list of neutral
nations, their allegiance and alliance levels, and the total number of
diplomat rating points assigned to that nation.  Also on this screen your
current diplomat is displayed above the menu bar.  The computer will also
display a number of diplomats that are not currently on missions.  These
diplomats are either newly acquired allies, or are assigned to a nation that
is now allied.

You receive two diplomats from each nation allied to you, and each diplomat
has a rating.  Diplomats are more effective in swaying neutral nations (those
with an allegiance of 4,5, or 6).  You may assign more than one diplomat to
help speed negotiations, but only 25 diplomat rating points can e assigned to
a negotiation (too many cooks spoil the soup).  As allegiance goes from one
extreme to the other, the diplomats become less persuasive.

From the diplomats screen, the Highlord player only also has the option to
declare war on one nation per turn.  Remember that you cannot move troops into
or through a neutral nation. When Highlord declares war, the nation may either
automatically ally with Whitestone or decide to go with Highlord, depending on
allegiance and a random 'die roll.'  By declaring war, the Highlord player may
gain many allies early in the game, but sometimes it will backfire.  Sometime
countries with strong Highlord allegiance will side with Whitestone in the
face of a war declaration.  Also, as the game progresses, and the influence of
the Highlord spreads, more and more of the unallied nations will shift towards
the Whitestone alliance.

The menu bar at the bottom of the screen controls all of your diplomatic
options:

        COUNTRY   DIPLOMAT   TRANSFER   MAP   EXIT   WAR

     Country: This allows you to select a country for diplomat transfer or war
              declaration.

    Diplomat: Cycle through the available diplomats and select the one you
              wish to transfer.

    Transfer: Send the selected diplomat to the selected country.

         Map: Go to the map.

        Exit: Exit the Diplomatic Phase.

         War: (Highlord only) Declare war on the selected country.  The
              selected country will automatically ally with Highlord or
              Whitestone.  The allied side may immediately deploy that
              nation's units (see Deploying Units).

Deploying units:
----------------
When a country first becomes you ally, you may deploy it's units anywhere
within the nation's borders.  The game will go to the map screen, place all
units in their starting positions, and then display this menu:

        MOVE UNIT    EXIT

   Move Unit: Allows you to deploy units.  The map cursor will highlight the
              current unit's position, and a summary will be displayed.  Move
              the unit to it's new location, and select that square.  After
              moving a unit you will return to the move unit menu.  Selecting
              MOVE UNIT again will go to the next unit.  Selecting unit's
              starting position will allow you to go to the next unit without
              moving the first.

        Exit: Returns you to the previous screen.

The fleets deployed at Maelstrom are automatically deployed and cannot be
moved until the player's movement phase.


COUNTRY STATUS
==============


This screen is a summary of the nations, and shows all allied, conquered and
neutral countries.


VICTORY PHASE
=============

The victory screen shows a summary of the overall forces for both players,
with the total killed or captured and remaining troops of each unit type.
This screen also shows the turn date, current score and victory status.
Points are gained for every enemy champion captured or killed, troop killed,
successful conquest and alliance.  The point values for each type unit are
displayed in the column to the right of the unit names.  Highlord victory
points are negative, while Whitestone points are positive, so a net score of
zero is a tie.


INITIATIVE PHASE
================

The program will determine which army has initiative.  The side with
initiative gets the first movement and combat phases, and receive 25% bonus
for the operation points for all units.


RECOVERY PHASE:
===============

During this phase units get all of their operation points back and recover
some of the fatigue they received during movement and combat from the previous
turn.  The amount of recover is based on the number of operation points left
unused by the unit from the prior turn and the following rules:

 - Units recover slower if they continue to move, if they are in an enemy zone
   of control and the further away they are from their home capital.

 - Units from nations with fleets are less affected by distance from home.

 - Units do not recover fatigue points during winter months.

 - Units recover at a faster rate if they are in a city, port city, fortress,
   tower or dwarven fort.

 - Units receive a 4% combat strength loss per fatigue point, and a 20%
   reduction if they enter combat with 0 operation points.


MOVEMENT PHASE:
===============

During the movement phase you may move troops, load and unload transport units
(fleets, pegasi, griffons, and citadels), and designate combat.  There are
several menus and displays to guide you through all the options.

Movement Menus:
---------------
The following menus control all actions during the movement phase:

        CURSOR   GET   RECON   LAST   QUAD   MAP   MENU

      Cursor: Move the cursor around the map.

         Get: Select a unit from the current cursor square.

       Recon: Determine the approximate enemy strength in the cursor square.

        Last: Return the cursor to the last square a unit was selected in.

        Quad: Center the cursor in selected quadrant of the map.

         Map: Switch between tactical and strategic maps.

        Menu: Go to the next menu.

If you select MENU from the cursor menu this will appear:

        COMBAT   SAVE   MENU   DELAY(#)   JOY/KEY

      Combat: Go to the combat phase.

        Save: Save the game in progress to another disk.

        Menu: Go to the previous menu.

    Delay(#): Change the game delay to speed up or slow down response time.
              The values cycle from 1 (fastest) to 9 (slowest).

     Joy/Key: Change between joystick and keyboard input.  This may not be
              available on your system.

When you GET a unit the following menu will appear:

        MOVE   EXIT   ATTACK   NEXT   ITEM   (UN)LOAD   PATROL

        Move: Move the selected unit.  After selecting this option, move the
              cursor from square to square until the unit is where you want it
              or has run out of operation points.  After moving a unit you may
              AUTO MOVE the other units in the original stack or abort the
              move.   The next menu will describe AUTO MOVE.  For information
              about movement restrictions, look at the Movement Rules section.

        Exit: Return to the cursor menu.

      Attack: Designate an attack on an adjacent enemy unit.  After selecting
              this option, move the cursor to the enemy square and select it.
              The attack menu will then come up.

        Next: This command will cycle through all of your units.  It is
              especially valuable to review the status of your troops.

        Item: Transfer a magic item from the current unit to another.
              Transfers may be made between units up to 4 squares apart.  A
              menu will allow you to select and verify target unit.  Fleets,
              griffons, and pegasi cannot transfer items.

    (Un)Load: (Fleets, griffons, pegasi, and citadels only) This allows you to
              load and unload units fro transport.  See (UN)LOAD menus for
              options descriptions.

      Patrol: (Fleets only)  Selecting this option toggles whether or not you
              want the selected fleet to automatically engage enemy fleets.
              If Patrol is set to yes, any time and enemy fleet comes within 1
              square, the enemy ships will stop and your unit will attack them
              during the combat phase. If enemy ships enter the Combat Phase
              within 4 squares of a fleet with patrol on, your ships will
              automatically move and attack.  Ships will patrol on may pass by
              enemy ships which are not patrolling.  See Naval Combat section
              for details.

This menu will appear after a unit has moved:

        EXIT   ABORT   ABORT 1 SQ   AUTO MOVE

        Exit: End movement for the current unit and return to move menu.

       Abort: Abort entire move back to the original square.  Abort will
              sometimes dock you unit 1 fatigue point when it is used.

  Abort 1 Sq: Move back one square.

   Auto Move: Have the next unit in the original stack automatically follow
              the unit that has just moved.

After selecting ATTACK the following menu will appear:

        TARGET UNIT   TARGET ALL   NO ATTACK   EXIT

 Target Unit: Attack an adjacent, enemy square with all units in the same
              square as the selected unit.

  Target All: Attack an adjacent, enemy unit square with all units in the same
              square as the selected unit.

   No Attack: This will remove existing attack orders.

        Exit: Return to the previous menu.

Selecting (UN)LOAD will display this menu for transport units:

        DISPLAY UNITS   LOAD   UNLOAD   EXIT

Display Units:Look at the troops currently loaded on the selected transport.

        Load: Go to the Load Menu.

      Unload: Go to the Unload Menu.

        Exit: Return to the previous menu.


        LOAD UNIT?   NO   YES   EXIT

         Yes: Load the unit displayed above the menu bar.  Except fleets and
              citadels, all transport units only load troops stacked in the
              same square.

          No: Cycle to the next available unit.

        Exit: Return to the previous menu.


        UNLOAD UNIT   EXIT   NEXT SQUARE

 Unload Unit: Unload the unit displayed above the menu bar.

        Exit: Return to the previous menu.

 Next Square: (Fleets and Citadels only) Cycle through all the legal
              destination squares for unloading.

If you select ITEM to transfer an item between units, this menu will appear:

        TRANSFER TO UNIT?   NO   YES   EXIT

          No: Cycle to next available unit.

         Yes: Transfer item to the unit displayed above the menu bar.

        Exit: Return to the previous menu.


Stacking Limitations:
---------------------
Most terrain types have a limit of 2 for the number of infantry and/or cavalry
that may be stacked together.  Also, you may stack 2 flying units (together
with infantry/cavalry) plus leaders and/or wizards for a total of 10 units
per square.  In cities and port you may stack 3 infantry and/or cavalry.

Unit Summary:
-------------
When you select a unit to move, load/unload, etc, there will be a summary
above the menu bar that looks something like this:

  NERAKA 1ST MERCENARY CAVALRY          #200
  QUALITY: 3   FATIGUE: 5   OP: 0   FORT: No
  NO ATTACK    ITEM: ARMOR

The first line of the summary gives the nationality, type, and the number of
troops in the unit.

The second line gives the quality (combat effectiveness rating from 1 to 7),
fatigue level (ranging from 0 - rested to 24 - exhausted), and the operations
points remaining.  For infantry and cavalry units this line will indicate if a
unit has had time to create defensive fortifications in its square (see Combat
Phase).  If the unit is a fleet then FORT information will be replaced with
PATROL information showing whether the fleet is currently on patrol or not.

The third line indicates whether or not the unit will attack during the next
combat phase, and whether or not the unit is carrying a magic item (see Quest
Section).  Also, this line will indicate if a transport is carrying other
units.

Terrain Description:
--------------------
As you move the cursor or units around the map you will see a summary line,
describing the current cursor location, that looks like this:

   FORREST (SILVANESTI)

Knowing the terrain type is important when planning movement or battles.
National borders are critical, as you may not move troops through neutral
countries.

Movement Rules:
---------------
A primary mission for you as commander, is effectively moving your troops to
accomplish your objectives.  Moving units are restricted by their number of
Operations Points (OP), by terrain and by enemy Zones of Control (ZOC).  OP
are the base number of squares a unit may move during a turn.  Moving through
forrest and enemy ZOC's cost a unit additional OP.  ZOC's are the 8 squares
surrounding a unit into which it can attack.  Fatigue is gained from movement
or combat and is shown on the unit summary.  Units gain fatigue somewhat
randomly during movement.

The following is a summary of the rules and restrictions for movement:

  - Units cannot move off the map.

  - Units cannot move into a neutral country.  A Neutral country is one that
    is listed on the diplomatic or alliance screens, and is currently
    unallied. Note that there are many areas of the map that both armies may
    move through freely. These areas will not have a country listed with the
    terrain description at the bottom of the screen during cursor movement.

  - Units cannot stack with enemy troops.

  - Normal movement cost is 1 OP per square.  Forrest squares cost 2 OP
    (except for eleven and kender units which cost 1 OP).  Movement for air
    units costs 1 OP for all terrain types.

  - Moving from one enemy ZOC to another costs 3 OP in addition to normal
    movement costs.

  - The only ground units that may move through mountain squares are: dwarf,
    ogre and wizards.

  - No ground units may enter sea, coast, river, or swamp squares (except
    wizards who may move through, but not end movement in them.  Also ground
    units may move across river squares if doing so on a fleet).

  - There are 3 basic types of units: Ground, Air, and Fleet.  The first type
    are limited to ground movment only.

  -  Air units move and attack from the air, but always end a movement phase
     by landing.

  - Transport units may load 1 large combat unit (infantry or cavalry) and
    up to 9 additional leaders and/or wizards.  Citadels are the exception and
    may carry 3 large combat units plus leaders and wizards for a total of 10
    units.

  - Fleets can only move in sea, coastal, river, or port city squares.  Air
    units may pass over but not end movement in these squares (except port
    cities).

  - Fleets may load/unload from adjacent squares or the same square if it is a
    port city.

  - When a fleet moves in the Maelstrom it automatically stops (see Naval
    Combat Section for more information)

  - If a fleet unit passes within 1 square of an enemy fleet which has patrol
    set to on, then the unit will stop until the naval combat phase (see
    (Naval Combat section for details).

  - Citadels may only load/unload from adjacent squares.

  - Pegasi and griffons may only load/unload from the same square.

  - Wizards can move with 0 OP cost (unlimited movement).

  - Wizards and citadels do not gain fatigue points.


COMBAT PHASE:
=============

The time for diplomacy has past.  Plans have been made.  The lines are
drawn... let the battle begin.  During the combat phase you will resolve all
battles on land, sea or in the air,that have been initiated during the
previous movement phase.  The first part of the combat phase is naval combat.

Naval Combat:
-------------
Naval Combat will occur during this phase whenever a fleet is adjacent to an
enemy fleet or if enemy fleets are within 4 squares of each, and one fleet has
patrol on.  If a fleet is within range of an enemy fleet with patrol on, the
enemy ships will automatically move in and engage if they have sufficient OP
to do so.  After naval battles are finished, you may either continue on to
land and air combat, or return to the movement phase.  In this way it is
possible to fight your way past blockades of enemy ships, and land troops in
one turn.

After the computer has found a naval encounter, it will automatically run the
first round of combat, after which the following menu bar will appear:

        CONTINUE COMBAT    WITHDRAW

If both players withdraw, the computer will break off combat and reposition
both fleets.  If only one player withdraws, there is a chance the enemy fleet
will follow and continue the attack.  At any time during the naval encounter,
fog may come in and end the battle.  After the combat is finished the player
whose turn it is will get the following menu bar:

        MOVE UNITS    COMBAT

  Move Units: Return to the Movement Phase.

      Combat: Go to the Combat Phase for land and air battles.

During Naval battles, fleets will lose ships and carried troops may also
suffer losses.  These ship losses decrease the amount of damage a fleet will
do during combat, but do not affect how many troops may be carried by the
fleet.

Land and Air Battles:
---------------------
After naval encounter, it is time to fight your land battles.  The program
will look around the map.  When it finds a conflict there will be a display of
the troops for both sides and the attacker will get this menu:

        RETREAT   LIGHT   HEAVY   ABORT   MAP

     Retreat: The attacker has reconsidered the wisdom of this engagement.
              Selecting this option will cause all friendly units in the
              battle to retreat one square on the map to avoid combat.  The
              defender has the option to counterattack and may still engage.

       Light: This battle posture will cause lower losses on both sides.  This
              option may be useful for attacks designed to harass the enemy or
              whittle him away for a later larger force.

       Heavy: This is a fully committed attack, and will produce the greatest
              losses to both sides.

       Abort: Abort the battle with no retreat.

         Map: Go to the map.

After the attacker chooses his strategy, the following menu will appear for
the defender:

        RETREAT    STAND   COUNTERATTACK    MAP

     Retreat: The defender retreats one square to avoid combat.  The attacker
              may still engage, but losses will be cut in half.

       Stand: The defender stand his ground and receives the enemy attack.
              With this option the defender will receive all defender bonuses.
              The defender should always select STAND if he is attacked while
              in any fortified square (city, port, tower, etc), as any other
              choice may move units into poorer terrain.

COUNTERATTACK:A Counter attack has the potential of inflicting heavy losses on
              enemy armies, at the expense of giving up the defender's bonus.

          Map: Go to the map.

The dragons of Krynn are power incarnate, and the very sight of them will
strike fear into the hearts of any foe - Dragon Fear it is called.  Dragons
fighting side by side with your troops will, with flashing talons and
devastating breath attacks, increase the enemy casualties.  But, fear of the
dragons is so great that many times the wise commander will only have the
dragons fly over the battlefield to paralyze the enemy troops with fear and
not actually risk these mighty beats in direct combat.  The following menu
will appear for each army that contains dragons:

        DRAGON FEAR   ATTACK

 Dragon Fear: This will cause the dragons to fly over the battlefield and
              paralyze enemy troops.  The Dragon Fear will cause the enemy to
              fight poorly, and not fighting directly will minimize any
              potential losses to dragon units.

      Attack: This selection will send your dragons to the front lines of the
              battle to maximize enemy losses at the risk of losing dragons.
              With this selection armies still gain the benefit of Dragon
              Fear.

After both sides have selected their strategy there is an option to have the
combat results displayed graphically:

        DISPLAY BATTLE?  NO   YES

          No: The losses for both sides will be displayed unit by unit.

         Yes: The battle will be fought graphically, with the computer moveing
              the troops automatically.

If the defending unit is destroyed the attacker will automatically advance one
stack of troops into the square (except into mountains).  After advancing, the
attacker will sometimes be allowed to attack again if more enemy units are in
range.

Units:
------
Many units have special abilities, limits, or effects on other troops.  Teh
following summarizes these units:

     Leaders: These units will cause a small increase in the overall
              effectiveness of other units in the square.  Leaders may not
              attack alone.

     Wizards: Wizard magic will greatly increase the overall effectiveness of
              other units in the same square.  Wizards may not attack alone.
              Wizards may move across any type of terrain (including water),
              but must end their movement on land squares.

    Infantry: Infantry units may build defensive forts if they remain in one
              square long enough.

     Cavalry: Cavalry receives a small strength bonus in open terrain (not
              tunnels, dwarven forts, etc) where horses may be used
              effectively.  Cavalry units may build defensive forts if they
              remain in one square long enough.

    Dwarves &
       Ogres: These units both receive a large strength bonus in mountain
              squares.  Only these ground units may move in mountain squares.

       Elves: Elves receive a large strength bonus in forrest squares.

      Kender: Kender receive a large strength bonus in forrest squares.
              Kender troops have a chance, when being attacked by several
              stacks of troops, of taunting the troops into impetuously
              attacking with one stack at a time.

   Dragons,
   Griffons &
      Pegasi: Receive a strength bonus in open terrain where they may use
              their air attacks (not tunnels, dwarven forts, etc).  Only these
              units may attack citadels.

    Citadels: Act like fortified cities for carried troops.  Only troops in
              citadels may attack from desert squares.

      Fleets: Can only attack other fleets, but may be attacked by adjacent
              land troops.

Terrain:
--------
The following summarizes the terrain effects on combat.

      Defender            Defender Strength Bonus
    Terrain Type     Small   Medium   Large   Very Large
    ----------------------------------------------------
    Dwarven Fort                                  X
    Dwarven Tunnel                      X
    Fortress                            X
    Fortified City             X
    Port City                  X
    Tower                      X
    Forrest            X
    Mountain           X
    Steppe             X
    Mountain Pass      X
    Tunnel Entrance    X


      Attacker   Defender Strength Bonus
    Terrain Type     Small   Medium
    ------------------------------------
    River                      X
    Stream             X
    Bridge             X


Maelstrom:
----------
The Maelstrom is a mysterious region of raging seas and violent winds.  Fleets
entering the Maelstrom will be thrown from it in a random place, but no before
possibly losing ships.

Forts:
------
When infantry or cavalry units are left in one square long enough without
moving they will automatically dig defensive forts.  A unit with a fort will
indicate it on the unit summary.  Forts greatly increase defensive bonuses and
are especially useful for units that must face withering attacks of enemy
dragons in open terrain.  Units in cities, ports, towers fortresses, and
dwarven fortresses do not get an additional fort bonus.

Surrounding Enemy Units:
------------------------
If a unit or stack of units is completely surrounded by enemy ZOC's its
strength drops dramatically.  This is valuable when attacking fortified
squares like cities and towers.

Experienced Troops:
-------------------
When troops experience combat they may randomly gain quality levels.

Conquered Nations:
------------------
War of the Lance is a game of conquest.  When your armies crush enemy nations,
the enemy alliance loses that nations' troops and diplomats.  Most nations
will fall when the capital is captured and hell by enemy troops until the
beginning of the next turns.  A few countries have more than one location that
must be held simultaneously.

To capture Silvanesti, you must also hold the fortress to the northwest of the
main capital and the two towers to the south in addition to the capital.

The Knights of Solamnia are the most tenacious of Highlord's foes.  These
nations start the game with high Whitestone allegiance levels, and before any
Knight country can be considered conquered, all of the KNight countries plus
the Clerist Tower fortress with its' infantry units (near Palanthus) must
fall.  The Knight countries are:  Caergoth, Northern Ergoth, Solanthus, and
Gunthar.  Also, before Solanthus is conquered, enemy troops must hold both the
capital and the fortress to the southwest.

To conquer Neraka, you must hold the capital and the tower to the northwest.


APPENDIX:
=========

Units:
------

NATION          TOTAL UNITS AND TYPE    BASE NUMBER     QUALITY
---------------------------------------------------------------
BLODE           7 OGRE INFANTRY             130           4
CAERGOTH        3 ELITE HUMAN INFANTRY      140           5
                2 ELITE HUMAN INFANTRY      130           5
GOODLUND        4 KENDER INFANTRY           130           2
GUNTHAR         3 HUMAN INFANTRY            140           3
                2 ELITE HUMAN INFANTRY      140           5
                2 ELITE HUMAN CAVALRY       130           5
                2 HUMAN FLEET                20           4
HYLO            6 KENDER INFANTRY           130           2
KAOLYN          5 DWARF INFANTRY            180           3
KERN            5 OGRE INFANTRY             130           4
KHUR            5 HUMAN INFANTRY            130           2
                1 HUMAN CAVALRY             130           2
KOTHAS          4 MINOTAUR INFANTRY         110           7
                4 MINOTAUR FLEET             20           5
LEMISH          4 HUMAN INFANTRY            130           2
                2 HUMAN CAVALRY             130           2
MAELSTROM       6 HUMAN FLEET                20           4
MITHAS          4 MINOTAUR INFANTRY         110           6
                4 MINOTAUR FLEET             20           5
NERAKA          8 MERCENARY INFANTRY        200           3
                2 MERCENARY CAVALRY         150           3
                2 RED DRAGON                  3
                2 BLUE DRAGONS                3
                1 GREEN DRAGON                4
                1 BLACK DRAGON                4
                1 WHITE DRAGON                5
NORDMAAR        4 HUMAN INFANTRY            130           2
                2 HUMAN CAVALRY             130           2
N. ERGOTH       3 ELITE HUMAN INFANTRY      140           5
                2 ELITE HUMAN CAVALRY       130           5
                2 HUMAN FLEET                20           4
PALANTHUS       5 HUMAN INFANTRY            130           3
                4 HUMAN FLEET                20           5
QUALINESTI      4 ELF INFANTRY              180           3
                4 PEGASUS                    84           1
SANCTION        3 HUMAN INFANTRY            130           2
                4 HUMAN FLEET                20           4
SILVANESTI      6 ELF INFANTRY              180           3
                4 GRIFFON                   240           1
                4 ELF FLEET                  20           3
SOLANTHUS       3 ELITE HUMAN INFANTRY      140           5
                2 ELITE HUMAN CAVALRY       130           5
TARSIS          3 HUMAN INFANTRY            130           2
                3 HUMAN CAVALRY             130           2
THORBARDIN      4 DWARF INFANTRY            180           3
THROTYL         7 HOBGOBLIN INFANTRY        150           2
VINGAARD        3 HUMAN INFANTRY            130           2
                1 HUMAN CAVALRY             130           2
ZHAKAR          5 DWARF INFANTRY            180           3
                4 GRIFFON                   240           1

SPECIAL UNITS:

HIHGLORD        9 BAAZ DRACONIAN            200           3
                10 KAPAK DRACONIAN          150           4
                2 SOTH UNDEAD INFANTRY      120           7
                3 WIZARD                      1
                3 CITADEL                     1
WHITESTONE      3 TOWER INFANTRY            140           4
                1 GOLD DRAGON                 3
                1 BRONZE DRAGON               3
                1 SILVER DRAGON               3
                2 COPPER DRAGON               3
                2 BRASS DRAGON                3
                3 WIZARD                      1


