WISHBRINGER

Notes on this walkthrough

This is a near-minimalist approach to the game. There are more items to
get than are listed here. I did it this way mainly because the number
and weight of items you can carry is quite limited in Wishbringer. Also,
some items can only be gotten in the daytime (such as the umbrella or
chocolate) or at night (such as the candle).

The ignored items are mostly those that are used to make the various
wishes in the story, none of which are necessary. The wishes for luck,
foresight, and advice are harmless (possibly helpful, if you were
playing the game normally) and have no effect on your point total. The
wishes for rain, darkness, and freedom provide some alternate puzzle
solutions that do not give you full points. The wish for flight is a red
herring and will cause you to lose the game.

The items used to make the wishes are: the umbrella (in the Twilight
Glen, the cemetery location west of the Spooky Copse), used to wish for
rain; the conch shell (beach location south of the pelican), used to
wish for advice; the horseshoe (next to the stump on Lookout Hill), used
to wish for luck; the bottle of grue's milk (in the refrigerator in the
Grue's Nest), used to wish for darkness; the chocolate (in the Police
Station), used to wish for freedom; the glasses, used to wish for
foresight; and the broom, to wish for flight. (We will pick up these
last two items anyway because they have other uses.)

Besides the wish items, we'll also bypass the candle (in the Church),
which is just a light source, and the leaflet (in the mailbox in the
forest found by going down the shimmering path), which you can feed to
the big mailbox on the Pleasure Wharf.


Festeron

Go inside the post office. Wait. Take the envelope that Mr. Crisp hands
you and leave. Go west twice, answering yes when the game asks if you
really want to go into the cemetery. Go north. Wait three turns for the
gravedigger to leave. Enter the grave and get the bone. Leave the grave
and return south and east to Outside Cemetery.

Go east twice more to Outside Cottage. Give the bone to the poodle. Go
north to Rotary South. Wait one turn for Miss Voss to give you a note.
Take it from her. Go north. Search the fountain. Take the coin. Go east
three times to Wharf's End. Pick up the seahorse and throw it into the
bay.

Return west three times to the Park, then go north four times to North
of Bridge and east to Cliff Bottom. Get the branch (twice). From here,
go up, west, north, up, east, south, and up. Open the door of the Magick
Shoppe and go in. Wait two turns for the old woman to come out from
behind the curtain, then give her the envelope. Open it and read the
letter to her. Wait one turn. Take the can she offers you. Wait until
you are outside the shop again.

For Your Amusement: Examine the Wanted poster in the Post Office. Attack
Mr. Crisp. Give Mr. Crisp an order. Give the envelope to the
gravedigger. Open the violet note. Read the theatre marquee at Rotary
East. At the Pleasure Wharf, go into the Arcade and examine the video
game. Go north from the Pleasure Wharf to the Tidal Pool, pick up the
conch shell, and listen to it. Off Rotary North, enter the Church and
try to take the candle. Examine the grandfather clock in the Magick
Shoppe both before and after the old woman appears. Examine the naughty
birthday cards in the Magick Shoppe. Enter the curtain in the Magick
Shoppe. Don't give the envelope to the woman, or, give it to her, but
then wait around without taking the can she offers you. Open the can
inside the Magick Shoppe.


Regarding the Boot Patrol

In Witchville (aka Festeron after Dark), you must avoid the Boot Patrol.
If they are "coming this way", immediately leave the room in some other
direction than the one from which they are coming. (The wish for luck
will not protect you from being caught.) If you only "hear the tramp of
marching boots" in a certain direction, you are still safe for the
moment, and can listen and wait for them to pass.

If you get captured, the first time you can escape by going down the
hole under the bunk, though you can't carry large items that way; the
second time you can wish for freedom if you have the chocolate. Whether
you survive a third capture depends on whether you saved the seahorse.
After that, you're toast -- or chum, as the case may be.


Witchville

Go back down the mountain by going down, north, west, down, south, east,
and down, then go west. Open the can; the snake inside will scare off
the troll. Get the can again and squeeze it. Get the stone and drop the
can. Open the gate and cross the bridge by going south twice.

Go west and south to Lake Edge. Examine the pit. Put the branch in the
pit, then get the branch again. Drop the branch. Dig in the sand. Get
the whistle. Examine it. Blow the whistle. Go west into the castle. Wait
one turn. Take the hat the King offers you. Wait one more turn. Blow the
whistle again.

Go north, then up to Lookout Hill. Examine the stump, then open it. Go
in. Go south and east. Go up, move the bunk, then go up again. Get the
blanket and go back down. Go north and east. Cover the grue with the
blanket. Open the refrigerator and get the worm. Close the refrigerator.
Return west twice and up. Close the stump.

Go down, east, and south twice. Examine the fountain. Put the worm in
the fountain and get the token. Go north twice and east twice to the
Lighthouse. Give the hat to the pelican and take note of the Magick word
you are shown.

Return west twice, south twice, and east. Read the schedule and marquee.
Give the gold coin to Miss Voss. Go in to the theatre lobby. Give the
ticket to the gravedigger. Go in again to the movie theatre. Look under
the seats and take the glasses. Put them on and watch the movie for four
turns. When it's over, remove the glasses and go out twice to leave the
theatre.

Go east and south into the Arcade. Examine the machine. Put the token in
the slot. Examine the screen and examine the star. It's on square E-3,
which is where you are now. Push the joystick west twice, then south
twice. Examine the star again - now it's on C-5, which is the square
with the Tower/Post Office. Push the red button. Answer yes twice.

For Your Amusement: Pick up the umbrella in the Cemetery, then descend
the mountain by wish for rain. Give the coin to the troll. Try the same
after first picking up the horseshoe from Lookout Hill and saying wish
for luck. Wait around instead of taking the hat from King Anatinus. Put
something in the wizard's hat, and then look in the display case in the
Museum at the end of the game. Examine the Wanted poster in the Police
Station. Wake the baby grue. Let the small mailbox from the forest meet
the big mailbox at the Pleasure Wharf, then notice what appears in the
Museum at the end of the game. Try putting something inside either
mailbox before they meet, too. Kill the stunted humanoids in the Arcade.


The Dark Tower and Library

To lower the drawbridge, type in the Magick word the pelican showed you.
Go into the tower. Go south and get captured by Mr. Crisp. Give him the
violet note. Get the lab coat. Look in the pocket. Get the key. Unlock
your chains with the key. Pull (do not push!) the lever. Drop the key
and lab coat. Get the violet note and read it.

Open the hatch and go up the ladder to the Round Chamber. Examine the
paintings, then move one. Turn the crank to open the drawbridge. Go up
again. Hmm, now where else recently was everything blurred and fuzzy...?
Wear the glasses. Examine the panel. Examine the first switch and the
second switch. Turn off the second switch. Get the broom. Go down,
remove the glasses, then go north twice out of the Tower. Go east. Type
Alexis, heel. (Feel free to pet the hellhound now, if you like.) Open
the cottage door and go in. Get the key. Leave the cottage and go north.
Unlock the door with the steel key. Go into the Library.

Go south twice. Examine the sculpture in the display case. Break the
case with the broom and take the sculpture. (I chose the broom mainly
because of its convenient location, but you can also use the umbrella,
shell, horseshoe, bottle, or dead branch to break the case, if you have
any of those with you.) Put the stone into the sculpture, and answer yes
twice when prompted. When you are transported to the Magick Shoppe,
knock on the door. Congratulations.

For Your Amusement: Wish for freedom while Mr. Crisp is present. Push
the lever on the torture machine up rather than pulling it down. Put
other objects (such as the black cat) into the torture machine and push
the lever up. Try to put the cat in the torture machine while the
Princess is still in it. Pour out the grue's milk near the black cat.
Read the message in the dust in the Cottage. Break open the display case
without first turning off the alarm. Put on the glasses before putting
the stone in the sculpture, then answer no when prompted. Answer no when
prompted whether you really want to put Wishbringer in the sculpture,
then put on the glasses when the old woman appears. (This one and the
previous elicit slightly different responses.) Give the stone to the old
woman in the Museum. Try to attack the Evil One. Pour out the grue's
milk near Chaos.

For Your Amusement at various times: Swear repeatedly. Wish for rain
outside while in the presence of another character. Drop the candle into
the bay, lake, or river. Get captured by the Boot Patrol and just wait
around in the jail cell. Get captured a third time by the Boot Patrol
both with and without saving the seahorse.