                WITNESS Part One

 This walkthru will help you to finish "Witness." Until I came
across "Suspect" this game was my favourite mystery, because of
the excellent plot of the game. Okay, you start South of the
house, where you just picked up a matchbook.  <By the way, none
of the stuff that came with the game is really necessary to
solving the case>.  Go North twice to the front door and ring the
bell.  Phong will let you in.  Then just try to go East, and
Phong will lead you to the Living Room, where Monica and Mr. 
Linder are. Now, wait <get used to doing that, because there's a
lot of waiting in this one>, and Linder will eventually take you
to his office.  Sit down in the wooden chair, and Linder will
hand you a note.  Read it, as it will help waste some time.  Now,
just do anything <but stay seated!> to make time pass.  Show the
matchbook to Linder for an interesting reaction, if you like.  In
any case, you just have to keep waiting. Eventually, Monica will
come in briefly to announce she's going to the movies.  This is
not what you're waiting for, however! So, keep on waiting, and
finally, the murder will occur. Linder will be shot while you sit
there, and you can't stop it from happening.  Read the
description carefully at the moment the shot is fired. There's
something odd about it. In fact, the whole thing is a setup. The
first thing to do is stand up, then push the button. Instead of
ringing to summon the butler, it causes a strange click to be
heard from the clock.  At this point, Phong will enter the room. 
Tell him you want the keys, and he'll hand them over to you. 
Now, examine the clock.  Keyhole seems a little strange, doesn't
it?  The doorbell rings while you're doing this, so as Phong goes
to answer the door, examine the keyhole.

                  WITNESS Part Two

 I'll bet you're getting some ideas already!  However, you'll
need to have the powder analyzed, and Duffy hasn't arrived yet,
so wait around until he does.  Then get the powder analzyed <you
can ignore Stiles, he's only a red herring>.  While that's being
done, examine the window <you can't open the clock yet, it's the
one key you don't have>. The green wire seems suspicious, so get
it for future reference. Now, go West into the Hallway, then
North twice, and open the Butler's door.  Go West into the room,
and read the mystery book <by the way, you can drop the telegram
and note, they aren't important>.  A gun receipt is used as a
bookmark.  The purchaser's name is obviously phoney, but hang on
to the receipt anyway. Okay, from the Butler's Room, go East
twice to Monica's room, then unlock and open the back door.  Go
East into the Backyard, then South twice to the office path. 
Aha, a muddy gun!  No fingerprints, alas, but you might want to
take it along with you, just in case.  Now, go West into the Side
Yard. Hmm, more footprints here, but they aren't quite the same
as the ones on the office path.  In fact, it looks like someone
was standing here for awhile. Wonder who it might have been? <No,
*not* Sergeant Duffy!>. Anyway, go West again to the driveway,
then North and East into the Garage. Unlock and open both the
garage door and the workshop door, then go East into the
Workshop.  The place looks like an electrician's paradise, and
there isn't much you can do here; but, there are spools of wire
hanging around.  Could it be...?  Examine spool, and you have
established a link of sorts between this place and the study. 
The green wire is obviously from this room.  Now, all you need is
the person who put it there.

                  WITNESS Part Three

 You now stand there waiting for Monica.  Just keep waiting;
she'll arrive <saying "Wait for Monica" is easiest.  It will take
a while, so if you want to hunt down Phong and ask him about the
gun receipt, you have time>.  When she does get there, she'll
fiddle briefly with the junction box <very suspicious!> before
noticing you.  Now, wait until she leaves, then follow her.  You
*must* use directions here, just saying "Follow Monica" won't
work. Follow her all the way to her room, and wait for her to
come back out of the bathroom.  When she returns, ask her about
Mr. Linder.  Her response will establish the motive.  Now, wait
some more, and she will eventually leave the room. Follow her
again, this time to the office. As soon as you get in there,
handcuff her.  Somewhere along the way, Sgt.  Duffy will have
left with the body, so you can't arrest her until he comes back.
In the meantime, you have to find some very important evidence. 
So, first search Monica for the key.  When you get it, unlock the
clock and open it.  She's already removed the gun, but you can
search her for that, also. Now, just wait until Duffy returns,
and arrest her for the murder.  And that should be about it.  By
the way, if you try leaving her and waiting in the office <so you
can find the gun in the clock>, you'll find that, however hard
you try, you won't be able to handcuff her <which is necessary so
she can be searched>.  So, you'll just have to wait and follow
her.
