Eamon #107 "The Last Dragon" Walkthrough by Tom Zuchowski


First, hints for those who want to solve it themselves:

There is much important information in the introduction text.

There are three magic words or phrases for you to learn that can get you
past certain obstacles. One of them also serves as a secret password
that identifies you to potential allies, both animate and inanimate. A
magic ring is required for some results.

If you find and read all of the clues carefully, you will know that the
old dragon has lived a full life and is now in pain, and she deserves to
die a noble death in combat. If you have properly interpreted the clues,
you will also know that the world will be a poorer place without dragons
in it, and you will have resolved to preserve the young breeding pair.

All bottles found are healing potions.

You don’t learn of your true Quest until halfway through the adventure!
A successfully completed Quest consists of whupping the bad guys and
exiting the treasure vault in the company of both baby dragons.

NOTE-you need a blank disk for a saved game. The saved files are deleted
when you resume the game, so if you want to preserve your saved place,
make a copy of the Save disk.

Let’s get started!

(This walk-through will not give you every single move as I have done
with the most difficult ones. Instead, here are general guidelines to
follow.)

You start on a beach. Board the ship and look around. When asked to pay,
respond by saying QUAAL DRACIS. Remember that phrase!

As you exit the ship look for a torch. As you proceed further, keep a
sharp lookout for hidden passages– there are a lot of them! Also keep a
lookout for hidden objects that can give you information about your
Quest.

When you reach the dusty plain above the beach, explore to the east
first. There is no key for the first door you encounter, so you will
have to break it down. Same for the large chest you find.

By the time you leave the stronghold, you should have a good idea what
Invictus is for, and should have found a lamp and a copper ring.

After returning to the dusty plain,  explore to the west. By the time
you reach the cave entrance that is blocked by a light, you should have
Invictus.

Your magical password will get you into the cave, but it will put you in
one of four different paths. Each winds up in a room blocked by a golden
light which can be passed via the usual means in this adventure. Note
that one of the four paths can rob you of your personal weapons if you
are injured by the unicorn.

The Last Dragon! By now you have learned to recognize that Vincingotrix
is old and in pain, and is worthy of an honorable exit in combat. Ready
Invictus and give it to her. After the Elf takes Invictus, remember to
ready your usual weapon.

Go west through the secret passage, and discover dragon eggs!
Vincingotrix was not the Last Dragon after all! Watch them hatch, then
say the words that reveal you as a friend.

Now you have learned your true quest. Say the word, and be about your
business!

Stay on the trails as you traverse the woods, unless you want to spend a
little time being lost. Proceed to the spot where you kill Kinth.

First, explore to the east, and free Igraine, then return to Kinth and
travel one move north.

From here, explore the path to the west. Use your magic to free
Woglinthe from the ice and Lisolet from the temple. Ishi gives you a
warning: what does it mean? (You will find out!)

Return to the main path and continue to Sauron’s stronghold. Explore the
upper tower first.

Sauron awaits beyond the bronze door in the lower level. You will find
him a worthy adversary as he shape-changes several times and turns a
companion against you before you defeat him. Remember that the whole
purpose of this foray is to blood the pair of dragons, never forget that
they both must survive lest the trip become meaningless.

After you’ve killed Sauron, help yourself to the treasure in his vault.
If the dragons are not with you at this point, summon them with the
remaining magic word that you’ve found no use for. They must be with you
as you exit back to the Main Hall. I really love this Eamon. It’s one of
my favorites. I hope you had a successful Quest!