CONTROLLING THE GAME
All Mines of Titan commands are executed by means of simple
key presses or joystick movements.

When you encounter a menu, move the highlighted bar up and
down in the menu using the joystick, up and down arrow keys,
or W for up and Z for down. (You can also use I for up and
M for down). Choose the highlighted selection by pressing
the joystick button, the spacebar, or the RETURN key. Note
that the bar will initially highlight one selection -- this
is not a hint or a pre-selected choice.

Any Yes or No menus can be responded to with the Y and N keys;
or by highlighting the appropriate response using the joystick,
the left and right arrow keys, or A for left and S for right,
then pressing the joystick button, the spacebar, or RETURN key.
(You can also use J for left and K for right.)

As long as you're not in combat and no other menu or window
is on the screen, pressing the joystick button, the space bar,
or the RETURN key will bring up the General Options Menu.

When the computer shows you a descriptive passage or an
informational display, it will wait for you to examine it.
To continue game play, or to go on to the next screen,
press any key.


MOVEMENT
Depending on your computer, you control your party's movement
by key instructions or joystick movements. Joystick movements
are as you would expect them to be. From the keyboard, you
can use the arrow keys and/or letter keys for movement. Note
that movement in cities and on the surface differ from movement
in mines and tunnels.

Letter Key/Arrow Key	Movement in Cities	Movement in Caves
			and on the Surface	and Tunnels

W/I/Up			Ahead			Turn/move north
A/J/LEFT		Turn left		Turn/move west
S/K/Right		Turn right		Turn/move east
Z/M/Down					Turn/move south


AUTO-MAP LEGEND
Mines of Titan includes an auto-mapping feature that creates
and updates maps of places you visit. Selecting VIEW MAP in
the General Options Menus brings up this map. To return to
the game, press any key.

The auto-maps of cities use letters to differentiate
establishments on Titan. The Auto Map Legend can be
called up on any computer terminal during the game.
The legend includes the key for the letters.

A  Armory				R  Repair Shop
B  Bar, Loung, Restaurant, or Barracks	S  Speeder Transport Center
C  Computer Center			T  Combat Training Center
D  Person Development Center		U  University
G  Gambling Casino			W  War Game Room
H  Hospital				X  Exit to Surface
M  Mine Elevator			?  Computer Terminal
O  Controller's Office			!  Munition Store
P  Police Station