LAIR OF THE MINOTAUR Author: Donald Brown

This is the second Eamon adventure and the first outing not explicitly
meant for beginners. It was released probably in late 1979, with or
shortly after the debut of the Eamon system itself, and is the first to
include features such as buried items and locked doors.


Premise

You've arranged to meet your girlfriend Larcenous Lil (or in the case of
a female adventurer, your boyfriend Slippery Sven) in the town of
Dunderhaven. When you get to town you learn that Lil, who arrived before
you flat broke, tried to get some cash by burglarizing a nearby castle
and hasn't been seen since. You go to the castle after her, but once
inside you're ambushed by bowmen under the command an ugly man on a
throne who takes you for another thief and casts you down a shaft to
meet the same fate as Lil. After a long drop and a "thud", you find
yourself unhurt but with no way to climb back up the shaft, and so must
venture into the tunnels beneath the castle.


Walkthrough

1. Pick up the lantern and take the exit south, which opens onto an
east/west tunnel. 2. Go west to find a short north/south hallway with
rooms on each end. In the north room is a coffin containing an animate
skeleton that leaps out when you open the coffin; defeat him and take
the skeleton key he drops. In the south room is an enormous stone, and
the word "cigam" in a mirror; saying the word backwards ("magic") will
make an emerald pop out of the stone. 3. Return to the first tunnel and
head east, where it opens onto the middle of a beach along a swift,
south-flowing river. The beach continues south (where you find an empty
bottle), but the way forward is north where a large boat rests on the
bank. Enter the boat and go east onto the river. 4. Riding the boat
south takes you back past the beach, then through a tunnel, and then
into a cliff-lined stretch of river. The cliffs prevent any landing to
the east, but three empty grottoes open to the west and you can exit
into any of them. (You'll encounter a killer bunny in the river outside
the middle grotto.) If you take the boat all the way to the south
grotto, you must exit there -- following the river further south into
the next tunnel will smash your boat into a grate and you'll be killed.
5. Each of the three grottoes open onto west-bound tunnels, all of which
converge at a four-way intersection guarded by a black knight whom you
must defeat. South of the intersection you'll also encounter the
friendly "wandering minstrel eye". 6. Continuing west you'll reach
another four-way intersection. The westbound tunnel is the way forward,
but explore the north and south ones first: 7. The northbound tunnel: 1.
This tunnel leads to a T-intersection with an east/west one. East is a
single chamber where you find a cloth bag; carrying the bag grants you
the ability to carry much more weight than normal. 2. To the west the
tunnel bends north and leads first to "Witt's End", then finally to the
"Insanity Room", a strange, illogical place where all the room's exits
(save one) lead back to itself. West is the true exit. 3. Return south
to the four-way intersection. 8. The southbound tunnel: 1. This tunnel
leads to the "Temple of Kalimar", which has two sets of side-corridors
that branch off to the east and west. 2. Following the first
side-corridor east takes you to a supply room where you find a shovel --
if you return with the shovel to the south grotto, you can dig to find a
bag of one hundred gold coins. Following the corridor west takes you to
a small room containing a jewel on a stand marked "Jewel of Molinar --
do not touch!" You can take the jewel, but doing so will deal you a
damaging electrical shock. 3. The second side-corridors leads east to
the temple's treasury (where you find 5,000 silver coins) and west to
the room of the high priest. Defeat the high priest and take his books
and morning star. 4. Finally the tunnel reaches the temple's chapel,
where Larcenous Lil (or for female adventurers, Slippery Sven) is
chained to an altar and guarded by a priest. Defeat the priest, take the
loot, and free Lil. 5. Return north to the four-way intersection. 9.
Going west your way is blocked by an iron gate; unlocking it with the
key obtained from the skeleton will make it fall into dust. 10. Beyond
the gate you find a smithy and a hammer-wielding blacksmith. Defeat the
blacksmith and (if you have the strength to carry it) take his valuable
golden anvil. 11. The smithy is the beginning of a maze of generally
featureless and labyrinthine corridors designed to confuse you, and
which sometimes connect in deliberately confusing or circular ways. From
the blacksmith's shop, go north twice, then west twice, then north
twice, then west four times, and you'll be at the south end of a
corridor that is your way forward. 12. Continue north and in a large
chamber you'll find the titular Minotaur, a strong enemy armed with a
battleaxe. Defeat him, take his axe, and exit north. 13. Following the
tunnel north you emerge outside into some bushes, with a clearing to the
north where you encounter a gypsy. Keep going north along the road to
reach the Main Hall.


Location

This adventure begins in the town of Dunderhaven but ends just outside
the Main Hall, the intervening distance being covered entirely on foot
or by relatively short trips in a boat, all leading generally south.
This likely places Dunderhaven a short distance north of Eamon Town.