Welcome, noble adventurer!

As the duly-designated wizard assigned to the kingdom of Vorr, you have
been chosen by the king to save the all-powerful Sparkstone from the
forces of evil. Without it, the kingdom will be left completely
defenseless (and without its lemony-fresh scent).

The Sparkstone - Tables of Florb is a choice-based interactive fantasy
set in a magical universe sprinkled with humor, sarcasm, and an
occasional heartfelt moment. It is playable on Apple II emulators (//e,
//c, IIgs) or online in most HTML-5 enabled browsers (Chrome is
preferable)

In the game your choices and other actions affect how the story
progresses as well as the outcome! For Example:

  1. If you were to attempt to throw a harpoon at the large,
  three-headed space whale, you might may or may not hit the creature on
  your first (or fifth) attempt.

  2. If you happen to bump into a large, stinky troll, it may be able
  clunk you on the head with its knobby wooden club before you have an
  opportunity to react, preventing you from making certain choices later
  within the story.


PLAYING THE GAME

When you are presented with a list of choices, simply use the arrow keys
to pick the one you want, then press the RETURN key to confirm your
selection. The fact that you've gotten to this screen suggests that
you've already mastered this minor puzzle. Congratulations! :-)


SPELL REFERENCE

If you don't have the printed spell book from the commemorative edition,
please take note of the following spells which your character will have
the ability to use during the game.

Enrov            - Extinguish fire and flame Flumish          - Teleport
to someone's current whereabouts Gundar           - Examine the
interconnectedness of an object Nurloq           - Restore the flow of
water Rannix           - Bring inanimate objects to life Snogul         
 - Track a scent over great distances Thonk            - Shoot harmless
sparks from a pointy object Varnada          - Summon an object within
direct eyesight Yumin            - Transform a mortal danger into a
minor inconvenience


SNAPSHOTTING AND/OR SAVING THE GAME

You CAN die (frequently) in this game, so you are advised to SAVE OFTEN
to avoid any... unfortunate circumstances! Your progress may be saved a
couple of different ways:

Taking a temporary SNAPSHOT or writing down the SAVE CODE for later use.

A SNAPSHOT is a temporary savepoint taken of your current progress
within the game. Simply press the 'S' at any choice prompt and a
snapshot will be taken and/or updated. You will receive confirmation of
this when the SAVE code is displayed within the game status bar (more on
the SAVE code in a minute).

Pressing 'R' at any choice prompt in the same game session will
instantly roll back time and take you back to this previous state.
SNAPSHOTS will NOT work between total reboots/restarts of your computer
or the game engine.

The SAVE CODE displayed on the status bar may also be written down and
used at the start of the game to restore your progress at any time.
Unlike snapshots, the ability to restore the game by using the save code
is not affected by game restarts or reboots.


RESTORING THE GAME WITH A SAVE CODE

When you're ready to pick up where you left off within the game, simply
start the game as your would normally and choose the "Restore A Saved
Game" option, press Return, enter the save code (all numbers and pipes
(|) in between the ()'s but not the parenthesis or any spaces), and
press Return again.


LIKE THE GAME?

If you find a bug, or you run into a problem, or if you think a certain
part of the game is too confusing, or if you have some other suggestion,
or if you'd just like to tell us your opinion of the game, we'd love to
hear from you!

​ COPYRIGHT AND DISTRIBUTION

Although this game is copyrighted, it may be FREELY distributed in its
unaltered form. Commercial resale of any portion of this game, including
the game engine is strictly prohibited without expressed written
permission of the author.

​ SPECIAL THANKS

A heartfelt, special thanks goes out to Olivia, Henry, and Heather for
their daily source of inspiration, love, and support.