BEAGLE BAG INSTRUCTIONS-----------------------GENERAL INFORMATION-------------------Beagle Bag is a disk full of games for your Apple computer.You may be surprised to find that it is a NORMAL DISK, justlike ones you have initialized yourself.  Most other gamedisks on the market are "locked up" and won't respond toeveryday DOS commands.  Not Beagle Bag - you can CATALOG it,LOAD from it, SAVE to it, DELETE and RENAME programs...ALLthat good stuff.  Even ctrl-Reset works "normally" (almost)instead of causing a memory-scrambling reboot.  Mostsoftware manufacturers lock their disks to (try to) preventpiracy.  Beagle Bros trusts you and leaves programs unlockedto make them more friendly and more usable.  We appreciateyour support; don't pirate our disks, and we won't pirateyours.The first thing you should do with Beagle Bag is BACK THEDISK UP using one of the "Copy" Programs from your SystemMaster disk (or any other Apple copy program).  Store thecopy or master in a safe place, away from prying magneticfields.If you're not using one of the two Menu programs on thedisk, you can RUN a Beagle Bag game just like any otherApplesoft program- Type "RUN" followed by the program nameand hit Return.  ENDING programs follows standard procedurestoo- type CTRL-C (sometimes ctrl-C/Return) or hitctrl-RESET.  You will usually be given the option ofre-running the program or returning to Short Menu.SHORT MENU----------BOOTING* the Beagle Bag disk is a good idea, because itinstalls Apple's normal Disk Operating System in your Appleand runs "Short Menu", a streamlined version of the moreall-purpose "Beagle Menu" (see next page).  After Short Menudisplays the game names, use the Arrow keys to move theflashing cursors to the game you want.  Hit Return to runthe game or Esc to quit the Menu.  Selecting the "(CatalogDisk)" option does just what it says.  Some Beagle Bag gamesdon't appear in the Menu, but will be seen in the catalog.You may adapt Short Menu to any normal disk.  Type yourapplesoft (and integer) program names, 16 maximum, separatedby commas, into a Data statement similar to Short Menu'slast program line (which you must DELETE).  END YOUR DATASTATEMENT WITH A COMMA, and SAVE your new menu BEFORE yourun it.  If you are having problems, you may want totemporarily delete the "Onerr Goto" command near the startof the listing.*If you're new around here- to "boot" a disk, type "PR#6"and hit Return.  If this fails, turn the power off, insertthe disk in the drive, and power-up again.BEAGLE MENU-----------The Beagle Bag disk contains a multi-purpose program called"Beagle Menu" that will display only the file names you wantin a text screen menu.  Go ahead and run it with anynormal-DOS disk in your drive.  Beagle Menu will take overyour Apple, first scanning the catalog and then displayingcertain files for menu display and execution.  BEAGLE MENUWILL PROBABLY NOT WORK IF YOU HAVE NON-STANDARD DOS INMEMORY.  To get standard DOS in memory, boot a normal disklike Beagle Bag or the System Master.PROGRAM LINE 100 determines which file names will bedisplayed in the menu.  Load Beagle Menu by typing "LOADBEAGLE MENU" (return).  Then type "LIST 100" (return).  Youmight see-     100 S=1: B=0: A=1: T=0: U=0S,B,A,I,T and U stand for Sector-numbers and Binary,Applesoft, Integer, Text and Unlocked files.  The number 1means DISPLAY that file-type; a value of 0 (zero) meansDON'T DISPLAY it.  In the example above, Sector-numbers tothe left of each file name WILL be displayed (S=1);Applesoft files WILL be displayed (A=1); Binary, Integer andText files will NOT be displayed (B=0, I=0 and T=0), andUnlocked files will NOT be displayed (U=0).  For almost ALLpractical purposes, you should LEAVE VARIABLES B AND T SETEQUAL TO ZERO.Change Line 100 to fit your needs, and SAVE the programbefore you run it by typing "SAVE BEAGLE MENU" (return).  Ofcourse, if you want, save it under the name "HELLO" or "N"or even "VISI CALC"; I don't care.  "N" is nice, because youcan simply type "RUNN" to run it.  There is a handy programcalled "Master Create" (on your System Master disk) that youcan BRUN to change the name of a disk's "Greeting Program",the program that automatically runs when you boot that disk.When Beagle Menu is Run, it will first "read" the disk thatis in the drive and then "catalog" it.  If and when thescreen is full (every 20 names), the program will "take apicture" of that "page" and store it in memory, then proceedto the next page of 20 file names.You will then see Page 1 on the screen with an inverse"cursor" to the left of the top file name.  To move thecursor, use the Left and Right Arrow keys.  If you move thecursor beyond the first or last file name on the screen,Beagle Menu will look for another page to display.  Playwith it and you'll see what I mean.Pressing Return will execute the program at the cursor.Applesoft or Integer files at the cursor will be RUN; Textfiles will be EXEC'd (probably inappropriate from a menuprogram, come to think of it..); and Binary files will beBRUN.  You must remember (or learn now) that many Binaryfiles are NOT MEANT to be BRUN, but BLOADed instead.  Ifyour BRUN a stored picture-file, for example, you will"crash" into the monitor, giving you an asterisk-prompt anda flashing cursor.Typing "L" will LOAD an Applesoft or Integer file (wipingout Beagle Menu, of course), or BLOAD a Binary file.  ABLOAD won't necessarily be obvious; for example, BLOADing ahi-res picture won't SHOW you the picture, it will just loadit into memory.  But then that's another subject.Typing "H" will display the HELP Page.  "Help" pretty muchexplains the rest of Beagle Menu's functions, so I won'tcover them here.In response to the comments I have had so far on thisprogram-Q. Why don't you display Free Sectors all of the time?A. Because free sectors are a fact you don't usually need toknow when you are running a menu program.  The lessinformation on the screen, the better, especially forbeginners or non-computerers ( a good reason not to displaysector-numbers).Q. Why not include other "housekeeping" commands, like Lock,Unlock and Rename?A. I'll leave that for you to do.  It kind of seemed likeover-engineering to me, maybe best included in some otherprogram.Q. Is this a Public Domain program?A. Heck NO!BUZZWORD--------BUZZWORD is a word substitution game that's good for atleast a few laughs.  Running it will produce a menu withOptions 1-6.Options 1-5, "Computer's Stories": Buzzword places fivestories in memory.  Select one of them and read along.  Thestory will be automatically typed except for the missing"buzz words".  You select the word by pressing any letterkey, A-Z.  The computer will then supply a word that beginswith the letter you typed.  Try any letters you like.  Usedifferent sequences (for example, your name, A-B-C...,etc.)for different results.Option 6, "Type Your Own Story": Select 6 from the menu andyou can type your own Buzzword story.  The computer willsupply a buzzword whenever you press a NUMBER key.  If youwant a number as part of your story, you'll have to spell itout.  The chart at the top of the screen indicates thepart-of-speech of the buzzword.  If you don't like the wordthe computer gives you, back-space over it and request a newone.  You must save or load a story to or from disk bytyping an "@".  To erase your story and go back to the menu,type two asterisks.To Put your own computer stories (for Options 1-5) inmemory, look at program Lines 9000-9600.  All text isentered as an A$ string.  When a NUMBER is encountered inA$, a buzz word is inserted-     1:  PERSON     5:  VERB     2:  PLACE      6:  PAST-TENSE VERB     3:  THING      7:  ING VERB     4:  ADJECTIVE       0:  Repeat the last buzz word whose number was followedby a slash.To view Buzzword's vocabulary by category, exit the programand List Lines 10000-10100.  For alphabetical listing, Runthe program, exit, turn on your printer (probably with"PR#1"), and type "GOTO 22222" (return).  Change any wordsyou want in Lines 10000-10100 (keep the NUMBER of words theSAME), and "Save Buzzword Version #2".ELEVATORS---------ELEVATORS is a real-time action game played with 12 keysplus the Space Bar.  When you run the game, you will see alo-res building with four elevators, the numbers "00" on theleft and "5:00" on the right.  To start the game, pressReturn.Three keys operate each elevator car.  Car #1, the car onthe left, is controlled by the 1, Q & A keys; Car #2 by 2, W& S; Car #3 by 3, E & D, and Car #4 by 4, R & F.  Noticethat these four groups of keys are in four vertical columnson the keyboard.  The TOP row of keys (1,2,3,4) makeelevator cars 1,2,3 and 4 go UP.  The BOTTOM row of keys(A,S,D,F) make cars 1,2,3 and 4 go DOWN.  And the MIDDLE rowof keys (Q,W,E,R) make the cars STOP and pick up passengers.The object of the game is to pick up as many carloads ofpassengers as possible between 5:00 (game starts) and 5:30(game ends).  The number of passengers you have delivered isindicated by the graphics number on the left of the screen.The time is shown on the right.Random lights will appear on various floors of the building.These lights represent passengers wanting to get out of thebuilding.  Any elevator car may respond to any light.  topick up the passengers, simply send any elevator car UP(1,2,3 or 4 key) to the lit floor and STOP (Q,W,E or R).Passengers will get in the car ONLY if it is UNOCCUPIED.  Ifyou stop an empty car at a lit floor, the floor light willgo off and the car itself will light up.  It is now FULL.You must now send the elevator DOWN (A,S,D or F) to theground floor.  Once the car is there, passengers willautomatically get off, and you will be credited with acarload of passengers on the scoreboard.Plan-ahead strategy is necessary for high scores.  Don'twait for floor lights before sending a car up.  Instead,send cars up in anticipation, and position them apart fromeach other ready to respond to nearby floors.  This is theway real elevators work.  If a car is stopped at a floor,and a light comes on, passengers will automatically getaboard.  It is also advisable to keep one of the cars nearthe bottom floor, because lower-floor passengers can behandled in the fastest time.  In this building, it could bea real disadvantage to be on an upper floor, but WINNING iswhat counts, RIGHT!?You may speed things up by pressing the Space Bar to cut thepower to one or more cars, thereby putting all energy intothe remaining ones.  The text below each car will indicatewhether or not it is on.  If your time is about to run out,and you're trying to get that last carload of passengersdown, Car #1 may be speeded up greatly by turning off thepower to Cars 2, 3 and 4.Variations:a.  Beginners often like to learn using only one elevatorcar for an entire game, then two, etc.b.  One player takes Cars 1 and 2; another takes 3 and 4.This makes it easier to concentrate on what's happening, andhigher scores are often possible.c.  Try using one, two, three and four cars and comparescores with other players using the same set.  You may besurprised!d.  If you own a compiler, compile Elevators and stand back!GAS CRUNCH----------GAS CRUNCH needs only one instruction:  It is possible towin, so don't give up.HANG PERSON-----------You don't need instructions for Hang Person do you?  Ididn't think so.  For two players or more, one player canenter a secret word or words for others to guess.  For oneplayer, hit Return-only and the computer will "think" of aword or words for you to guess.  To change the computer'swords in the program, List Lines 10000-10140 and replace anywords you want, but keep the total at 150.  The programdecides which of the 150 words to pick in Line 9000.MAGIC PACK----------MAGIC PACK consists of four tricks:  PLENTY QUESTIONS, 21NUMBERS, NEXTWORD and CARD SCANNER.  Select them all fromMagic Pack's menu.  Plenty Questions and Card Scanner arenot meant to be run by anyone other than a "magician" (you?)who has PRACTICED with these tricks.1. PLENTY QUESTIONS-------------------PLENTY QUESTIONS involves some "computer magic", and you arethe magician.  YOU MUST PRACTICE THIS TRICK several times toget the hang of it (it's worth it; audiences really enjoy aslick presentation of this trick).The object of Plenty Questions if for the computer to guessthe audience's secret word by asking certain "Yes or No"questions.Tell someone to think of an object (in this case, any wordor words that can follow the word "a" or "an").  you must besure that the secret word is 16 characters in length or less(12-or-less is better), containing only the letters Athrough Z, spaces, hyphens and/or apostrophes.  NO PERIODSallowed.When you see "Hit Any Key When Ready", pretend as though youare hitting just ANY key, and casually (but carefully) hitctrl-A ( the CTRL key, then the A key; holding both down atthe same time).  You are now in the "Magic Mode".  If anykey OTHER than ctrl-A is hit first, the trick WILL NOT WORK(see "Non-Magic Mode" below).  The computer will now ask arandom question and wait for a Yes or No answer.The first character you type before each answer WILL NOTAPPEAR on the screen.  This is the big secret of PlentyQuestions!  Your job as the magician is to carefully spellthe secret the secret word, one letter at a time, onequestion at a time, with an INVISIBLE SECRET LETTER beforeeach answer.The computer's questions and your answers are irrelevant.You should type mostly "Yes" and "No" answers with anoccasional "Sometimes" or "???" to make the trick morebelievable.  Other answers such as "Never" or "No Way!" areappropriate too.The best time to type the secret letter (remember, no onemust know you are doing it!) is WHILE the computer is typingout its question.  At this time, all eyes will be on thescreen and not on you or the keyboard.  you can even readthe question out loud to distract everyone from any sound ormovement from the keyboard.  After you type your secretletter and your Yes or No answer, press the Return key.  youwill know each secret letter has been entered into thecomputer's memory when the letter "I" in "PLENTY QUESTIONS"at the top of the screen changes to a number 1 (one).To finish a secret word, type a PERIOD as your invisiblesecret letter.  For example, if the secret word is "Cow",your answers could be "(C)Yes", "(O)No, "(W)Maybe" and"(.)Sometimes" (invisible characters in parentheses).  Afteryou type an invisible period and a Yes or No answer and hitReturn, the computer will finish with an "I've Got It!",followed by "It's a Cow!" or whatever the secret word is.If you make a mistake and have not yet typed your Yes or Noanswer, hit Return, and type a new secret letter.  If youhave already typed an incorrect secret letter and answer ANDhit Return, enter a Left Arrow (backspace) as your nextsecret letter.  This will ERASE the previous secret letter.In the confusion, you may wonder if you are misspelling thesecret word.  Don't worry too much; who says a computer issupposed to be able to spell?If you want to start the secret word over, type a Slash, andall of your previous secret letters will be erased frommemory.To delay the computer's guess, enter a Right Arrow as yoursecret letter.  The computer will ignore this character andlet you answer another question.  This is a handy featurewhen the secret word is very short and you want to see a fewmore questions.If you don't know the secret word or if you need an escapebecause you are confused, type an invisible Comma beforeyour answer, and the game will end with the computerguessing a random word.  It doesn't hurt to have thecomputer guess wring occasionally.  After all, he (she) isonly human...There are two built-in default words.  The computer willguess "LIGHT BULB" whenever you type a secret Semi-Colon.It will guess "TUNA SANDWICH" if you enter a secret Periodafter only one question.  You can set the audience up withone of these two words if you think they have figured thingsout.  You can change these default words in program Lines1460 and 1500.  Be sure to include a period at the end ofthe words, like this: S$="WORDS."Non-Magic Mode:  Sooner or later, one of your audiencemembers will insist on typing th answers themselves, or theywill refuse to tell you the secret word.  If this happens,you have shown the trick once too often.  Let the skeptictake over anyway.  He will hit "any key" (not ctrl-A) whenasked to do so, and now the computer will NOT look forsecret characters.  Instead, it will ask 17 questions andthen make a random (and undoubtedly incorrect) guess.Explain that the computer is probably tired, and go on tothe next trick.  If you are experimenting with the Non-MagicMode and wish to end before 17 questions, end any Yes or Noanswer with a Period, and the questions will stop.PLENTY QUESTIONS COMMAND SUMMARYMAGIC MODE (invisible):Secret Letters:  Enter one per question before answering thequestion.  The letter "I" in "Plenty Questions" at the topof the screen changes to a number "1" when the secret letteris entered.     Period:   End secret word.  Computer will guess secretword.     Comma:    End questions.  Computer will guess randomword.     Slash:    Erase all previous secret letters.  Continuequestions.     Left Arrow:    Erase previous secret character.Continue.     Right Arrow:   Delay secret letter input until nextquestion.     Semi Colon:    End questions.  Computer will guess"Light Bulb".     Period (as first secret letter):  End questions.Computer will guess "Tuna Sandwich".NON-MAGIC MODE:After 17 questions: Questions end.  Computer will guess arandom word.Period (visible after answer): Questions end.  Computerguesses a random word.2. 21 NUMBERS-------------21 NUMBERS is another trick where an audience member cancontrol the keyboard.  Just follow the instructions on thescreen.3. NEXTWORD-----------Just follow the instructions on the screen.  Hit Returnafter each word.  The secret?  We're not telling...Well, I suppose we could tell YOU.  The computer starts hisnext word with the LAST LETTER of your word and expects youto do the same.  If you're into reprogramming this, youcould make his word start with the SECOND letter of yourword, or the next-to-last letter, etc., etc.4. CARD SCANNER---------------You're the magician again.  Your Apple, with some help fromits "Advanced Video Scanner" (people really BELIEVE this!),will read a randomly-selected playing card through the videomonitor.  The trick here is, first of all, to know what thecard is yourself.  Then, when the computer says to type"RUN", you pretend to, but you DON'T.  Instead, you type theinitials of the card's identity, and NO MATTER WHAT YOUTYPE, the letters R-U-N- WILL APPEAR ON THE SCREEN.  Hereare the code letters for the playing cards:     First key ("R" appears)-     A or 1: ACE     2 through 9: NUMBER-CARD, 2 through 9     0 (zero): 10-CARD     J,Q or K: JACK, QUEEN OR KING     Second key ("U" appears)-     C,D,H or S: CLUBS, DIAMONDS, HEARTS or SPADES     Third key ("N" appears)-     N: (insignificant).For example, to indicate King of Spades, type "KSN", and hitReturn.  For Eight of Diamonds, type "8DN"; for Ace ofClubs, "ACN" or "1CN"; for Ten of Hearts, "OCN", etc.If you type an illegal code or "Run", the computer's answerwill be "Playing Card", which is indeed a correct answer!As with any magic trick, don't overdo it!  On about thethird performance, people will be watching your fingers, andit's probably then time to switch to another trick whereTHEY control the keyboard (21 Numbers or Nextword).NAME GAME---------NAME GAME is a real crack-up at parties.  The instructions,however, are a bore, so I omitted them.OINK!-----OINK! is an easy-to-play two-key game.  Enter two players'names (come on, be imaginative with those names!).  PressReturn after each.  The computer will decide who goes first.Type "R" to roll the dice.  You will be awarded points equalto the number you roll.  Roll as many times as you want,EXCEPT if you roll DOUBLES (both dice the same), your turnwill end, and you will lose your points for that turn.     Type "Q" to quit your turn and keep all of your points.Bonus points are offered as incentive not to quit.  Firstplayer to 200 points and type a "Q" wins the game.PICK-A-PAIR-----------PICK-A-PAIR is a great party game that will alleviate"Computer Phobia" (a common disease these days) in almostanyone.  Try Pick-a-Pair with your non-typing ornon-computer friends.  It's easy to play and they'll likeit.Follow the screen prompts and enter two players' names.  TheApple will decide who goes first.  Each player in turn willbe asked to select two numbers from 0-15.  Pressing returnis not necessary.  Each number selected will reveal a colorsymbol.  If the symbols match, you will be rewarded withpoints TOTALING THE TWO NUMBERS SELECTED.  Therefore, it iswise to pick high numbers first.  The first player with 68or more points wins the game!QUICK-DRAW!-----------QUICK-DRAW is a battle between two video gunmen who nevermiss.  They are controlled by two keys; the left man by theZ key, and the right man by the /? key.  You will probablyneed two players to play Quick-Draw, although our UncleLouie has been known to spend hours up in the attic pittinghis left hand against his right!Press Return to start each turn.  Several color symbols willflash on the screen.  One will stay for a couple of secondswith the words "FIRING SYMBOL" under it.  You must rememberthis symbol!  The next time you see it, you must press yourkey, (Z or /?), as quickly as possible, before your opponentpresses his.The first shooter to press his key while the firing symbolis on the screen shoots his opponent.  If you press your keyfirst while any other symbol is visible, your opponent getsa free shot at you (and he won't miss!).  All bullets willbounce into the bullet bucket and trigger the scoreaccumulator.  Point totals for each shot are determined bythe time on the screen when the shot was fired.  The fasteryou shoot, the larger your score for that turn.  Firstplayer to 10 points wins.  A rounded-off score appears oneach player's hat.  The exact scores appear on the textscreen below each shooter.SLIPPERY DIGITS---------------SLIPPERY DIGITS works just like your old 15-number game.Try the "Visible" version first to get the hang of it.  TheArrow Keys move the numbers Left and Right, and the A and ZKeys move them Up and Down.  When a number enters its properlocation, you will hear a musical "beep" (if you haven'tturned off the sound).In the Invisible Mode, each number will become visible ONLYWHEN IN THE CORRECT POSITION.  Look at the horizontal color(or grey) bars at the top of the screen.  These indicate thecolor of the number blocks that should be in each verticalrow.  This feature is especially helpful in the InvisibleMode.The "Black & White or Color TV?" choice at the beginning ofthe game simply gives the number colors more contrast inBlack & White, and more color in Color.  Both ways, the gameworks the same.The shuffle before each new game will take longer on somegames.  The computer checks after each shuffle to see if itis physically POSSIBLE to achieve numerical order.  Half ofthe time it isn't so it re-shuffles.SUB SEARCH----------SUB SEARCH is a real-time search for a group of invisibleenemy "submarines".  Your job is to seek out these subs andcapture their fuel supplies before your fuel and oxygen runout.     When you run Sub Search, your Apple will decide howmany subs you are to find and determine your oxygen and fuelsupplies.  Press return when ready to begin your search.Five keys control the movement of your sensor on the screen:     To move UP & DOWN, press the A & Z keys.     To move LEFT & RIGHT, press the Arrow keys.     To JUMP 15 SPACES (at a cost of only 10 units of fuel),press the Space Bar.Each of these five direction keys only needs to be pressedonce to cause movement in the appropriate direction.  It's agood idea to keep your fingers on these keys during thegame.Data regarding fuel supply, oxygen supply and number of subswill be updated on the lower section of the screen.The SCANNER is activated with an S keypress.  Missing subswill be temporarily reveals with "blips" in the horizontaland vertical bars on the screen.  Using the scanner willcost you 40 units of fuel, so activate it sparingly.  Afterthe scanner is used, press a direction key to continuesearching.The EQUALIZER converts fuel to oxygen and vice versa.Hitting Q will trigger the equalizer and prolong yoursearch.OXYGEN:  Your oxygen will decrease at an erratic ratewhether you are moving or not.  The only way to obtain moreoxygen is to use the Equalizer (Q).FUEL:  Your fuel supply will decrease one unit for everyunit you move on the screen.  Locating an enemy sub WILLINCREASE your fuel supply by 40 units.  Using the scanner(S) will COST you 40 units.FINDING SUBS:  Besides using the scanner (S), invisible subsmay be found by searching with your sensor, using thedirection keys (A,Z, and Arrows).  Your sensor will leave atrace pattern so you can tell where you have searched.  Thistrail will be erased if you use the scanner.  If youencounter a sub, you will notice it in your trace pattern.You will also notice your trace pattern slowlydisintegrating as you move.  Do not confuse the "holes" inthe pattern with the subs you are looking for.You must land PRECISELY on a sub to capture it.  Oncecaptured, a sub will become visible, and you will hear oneor more beeps.  The number of beeps tell you how many subsyou have NOT yet been located.  This information alsoappears on the lower right of the screen.The game ends when you have found all of the subs OR whenyou have run out of fuel or oxygen.  you will be given afinal score based on the percentage of subs found times1000, plus the amount of fuel and oxygen you have left.TEXTTRAIN---------by Bert Kersey & Jack CassidyTEXTTRAIN is a real-time race against a "train-time" clock.you will keyboard-control a text-format "freight train"whose "engine" and "cars" appear on your monitor as textcharacters-  The engine is an inverse asterisk/plus, and thecars are inverse and normal letters.  You control the motionof the train (Forward and Reverse); the five turnouts ortrack Switches; and the Coupling and uncoupling of the cars.The object of TextTrain is to couple together a pre-definedseries of freight cars and pull them to the Check Station atthe top of the track layout in the fastest possible time.At the start of the game, you will be asked to type a word.This word must be from one to nine letters in length andcontain no non-alphabetical characters and no letter "P"(explanation later).  This word or series of letters will bethe "train" you must create during the game.  If you're abeginner, start with a two-or-three-letter word.  After youtype the word, hit Return, and the game will start.Your Apple will draw a track layout, scramble the letters ofyour word, and place them, along with several random letterson the layout as freight cars.  Notice that the clock startsrunning immediately from time 0:00.  The clock runs quitefast to make up for the small scale of the train (as good anexplanation as any!).  Above the clock is a representationof the train you must create.  On the track, you will seethe engine, always an inverse two-character car.  The front(asterisk) of the engine flashes while it is idling.  Theplus-sign is the back of the engine onto which are coupled afew cars (letters).  The Freight On Board (F.O.B) Chart atthe left shows what's in the cars.While the train is idling, you are in the "Command Mode".The commands available to you are displayed at the bottom ofthe screen.  The F, R, C and S keys are the only keys thatwill do anything in this mode, except the asterisk option isnot displayed on the screen.FORWARD and REVERSE motion is initiated by pressing F and R.Try it.  To STOP the train, hit any key except F and R.  TheSPACE BAR is the most easy-to-find "brake" key.  It ispermissible (and often very efficient) to hit ANY of theCommand Mode keys (F, R, S or C) to stop the train.As the train travels around the track to the topstraightaway, its string of cars will read backwards.  Theorder of cars you will be concerned with is FROM THE ENGINEBACK.  Notice that the trains "*+HARVEY" and "YEVRAH+*" arethe same.SWITCHES are thrown by first pressing the S key.  When youhit S, all five switches will light up with numbers.  Tothrow a switch, simply press the appropriate number key.  Ifthe switch is "open", it will "close" and vice versa.  Anykey other than 1,2,3,4 or 5 will put you back in the CommandMode.  If a car is on or near a selected switch, you will bewarned and returned to the Command Mode.  Keep an eye on theswitches as your train moves.  Your train will DERAIL, thusending the game, if it encounters a closed switch!COUPLING and UNCOUPLING are initiated with a C keypress.After hitting C, you will be asked how many cars you wantbehind your engine.  This must be a number from 0(engine-only, no cars) to 9.  No train longer than nine cars(plus engine) is allowed.  You MUST enter a proper one-digitnumber to get out of the Coupling Mode.  To couple cars ontoyour train, you must BACK YOUR TRAIN into them.  Your trainwill automatically stop, and you will be put in the CoupleMode.YOU CANNOT COUPLE CARS ONTO THE FRONT OF THE ENGINE.  Anattempt to do so will derail the train and end the game!The same misfortune will occur if you forward OR reverseinto the siding bumper (just under the clock).  You muststop BEFORE you reach the bumper, or you crash!The Freight-On-Board (F.O.B) Chart identifies the cars theengine is coupled to.  Each car's letter stands for thecargo of the car- B for Boxes, K for Kites, etc.  If thecargo word on the F.O.B. Chart.  If you want, change the setof words in the TextTrain listing (Lines 2070-2110) to suityourself.To successfully finish a game, you must drive your completedtrain COMPLETELY INSIDE the Check Station and STOP.  (NOTE:You also may drive THROUGH the Check Station or stop thereanytime you want.)  If you do stop, your train willautomatically be inspected for a modest fee.  If your trainconsists of the correct freight cars IN THE CORRECT ORDER,your time will ne noted and compared with the best time sofar for the current set-up.  From the second repeat game on,the best time so far will be posted under the clock.  When agame ends, you will be given three options.  An asteriskwill end the game.  ESC will let you type a new word andclear previous times from memory.  Any other key will starta new game with the same set-up as the previous game.Why no P's in TextTrain trains?  It's pretty technical, butif you're interested, the program uses Applesoft's SCRN()function to look for clear track (spaces) in front of theengine as it moves ahead.  If no space is found, it's derailtime.  The letter "P" just happens to be the same lo-rescolor (O-Black) in it's upper half as the space character.To distinguish a "P" from a space, the engine would have tolook at the bottom color of each character in front of it asit traveled (space's bottom half is 10-Grey and P's is13-Yellow), but this would slow things down considerably (Iknow; I tried!).  So no P's, o.k?  One Beagle Bros Tip Books(I can't remember which One) explains more about colors andApple text characters.  The "Railroad Regulations"explanation in the game (if you try to enter a "P") mightmake more sense.Strategy is important for fast TextTrain times.  Think aheadand look for pairs or other groups of cars that can staycoupled together.  You can save time by going directly toSwitch or Couple Modes by hitting S or C while the train ismoving.  Experiment with different methods, and have fun!TRIPLE DIGITS-------------TRIPLE DIGITS is for two players.  Each is dealt the samethirteen digits (0,0,0,0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7 and 8).  One playerplays black numbers, the other plays white.  The numbers areto be placed one at a time in an UNOCCUPIED SQUARE on thescreen.  Follow the computer's instructions for playingnumbers.You will notice approximately 20 squares blocked with ...'s.These squares are NOT usable unless they become unblocked.The computer blocks and unblocks squares at random betweenturns.Scoring is done by placing 3 OR MORE of YOUR digits in arow-     HORIZONTALLY, reading Left to Right, or...     VERTICALLY, reading Top to Bottom, or...     DIAGONALLY-UP, reading Left to Right, or...     DIAGONALLY-DOWN, reading Left to Right.For example, a 9-3-2 will give you 932 points; 0-5-0 willgive you 50, etc.  Use your numbers strategically forhighest scores or to block your opponent from scoring.  Itis desirable (and profitable) to score in two or moredirections on the same turn.Every score will contain the digit you just played and twoadjacent digits (THREE-TOTAL, no more).  If there is morethan one way to add a score in any one direction, thecomputer will pick the HIGHEST POSSIBLE combination.  Sayyou added a 3 to make a 4-1-3-2 string of numbers.  You willget 413 points, not 132.The game ends when all numbers have been played, OR if aplayer gives up and types a "Q" at the start of a turn.  Theplayer with the higher score wins.WOWZO-----WOWZO is for two players, but don't let that stop you fromplaying against yourself!  Before the game starts, someprobing questions will be asked of you.  Type your answersand hit Return after each.NAMES OF PLAYERS:  If your name is FRANK and you preferDARTH or PRUNEFACE, by all means, use it.  The secondplayer's name will be rejected if it has the same firstthree letters as the first player's name.  You'll see whylater.LEVEL OF DIFFICULTY:  Selecting 1,2 or 3 will control thespeed of the game clock and the time limit between moves.Beginners should use 3.  Give 1 a try too; it's fun!KEYWORD:  Enter any 5-letter word or series of letters withNO REPEAT CHARACTERS.  Then hit Return.The object of Wowzo is to move your "man" (the first threeletters of your name) through the maze and land on ALL FIVEof the keyword letters before your opponent.  There is no"beginning" and no "end" to the maze.  After you enter alegal keyword, the Apple will place its letters in randommaze positions and place the first three letters of eachplayer's name in the upper left corner.  These three lettersare the player's "men".The computer will decide who goes first- let's say George."GEO" will flash in the maze, and the computer will print"George's Turn-Which Direction?", or "Which Gate?".  You,George, must respond accordingly before the timer reacheszero.  Assuming time doesn't run out, on each turn you willmove at least one gate AND move your piece at least once,but NOT NECESSARILY IN THAT ORDER.WHICH DIRECTION?  To move your man in the Wowzo maze whenyou are asked "Which Direction?", press a key-     To move Left or Right, press an Arrow key.     To move Up or Down, press the A or Z key.Your man will move in the direction chosen until itencounters a maze wall OR keyword letter.  In either case,it will automatically stop.  If you land on a letter,whether you need the letter or not, you get another turn.If you hit a wall without encountering a letter, your turnis over unless you haven't moved a gate...WHICH GATE?  Any gate may be moved on any turn.  When thecomputer asks "Which Gate?", press a gate letter.  Theappropriate gate will pivot 90-degrees.  Don't press Return.COMPUTER GATES:  After each player's turn, just to makethings more interesting, the computer will move tworandomly-selected gates.When you land on a letter, the following happens: a. Youwill be credited with the letter on the scoreboard (if youdon't already have the letter) b. The computer will replacethe letter somewhere else in the maze. c. You will get aBONUS TURN; another GATE and MOVE.If time runs out during your turn, you will be sent, via AirMail, to the upper left corner of the maze, and your turnwill end. Period.Wowzo Strategy:  The most obvious defensive strategy is touse the gates to seal off your opponent about ten miles fromthe nearest letter that he needs.  Also, use already-landedon letters for extra mileage via bonus turns AND to remove aletter from your opponent's path.  Try to line up withseveral letters and grab them all in one turn.  A game ofWowzo can end abruptly this way!PLUS----Some of these programs have been gathering dust around herefor years (a couple of them probably should have STAYEDhere).  Some of these relics won't appear in the Short Menuuntil you catalog the disk.DATE SEARCH is my favorite, I suppose.  Even though it isn'treally a game, people get a kick out of it.  The only goodthing I can say for CROSS WORD is that it lives up to itsname.  OINK is explained fully on page 13.  If you use oneof the names from BABY NAMES for your kid, please contactour lawyers (Legal Brothers) concerning royalty fees.PACK MY BOX is a challenge that will probably never be met,but let us know if you do!  POLY-DICE is fun if you're astatistics nut- You may want to expand it to roll more dice(how about all night long?).  I can't BELIEVE how longpeople will play NAME GAME.  See page 13 for more details.Every Apple owner should have a copy of TEST PATTERNS(although it could get expensive).  And PLEEEEEEASE don'tphone the Beagle Building saying your copy of NAKED CITYdoesn't work; it's SUPPOSED to do that!  Secretly load itinto a friend's Apple, and stand back and watch...