
BATTLE OF THE ATLANTIC
A Computer Game Of The Ocean Lifeline,
1939-1944.

Index:
       1.0	   Introduction
 2.0	General Course Of Play
 3.0	Game Equipment
 4.0	Getting Started
 5.0	The Orders Segment
 6.0	The Reports Segment
 7.0	The Activity Segment
 8.0	Reinforcement & External Events
 9.0	Ending Or Saving The Game
10.0	Victory
11.0	Designer's Notes On Play

Credits:
Design &  Programming: L. Howie
Development:  S. Newberg
Debugging:  L. Howie & S. Newberg
Cover Art:  J. Kula, (c) 1984
Printing:  Hatcraft Print & Reflex Offset
Die Cutting: Freedman Die Cutters

The enclosed software program on diskette, rules booklet, map sheets, & die cut counters are copyrighted.  All rights are reserved. These items may not be copied, photocopied, photographed, reproduced, translated, or reduced to any electronic or machine readable form, in whole or in part, without prior written consent from Simulations Canada.  The software Program may be copied, by the original  purchaser only, to provide a secure backup copy of the provided program diskette. However, such a copy may not be given away or sold to other individuals or firms of any form.  We do not protect our software so that purchasers will not have difficulty making a backup copy.  Please do not abuse this policy.

@Copyright (c), 1984, Simulations Canada, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, Canada, B4V 2X6.

1.0  INTRODUCTION: BATTLE.  is a detailed game type simulation of modern naval combat in the North Atlantic for one or two players.  Players control the major naval and naval air forces of 'either Germany or the Allies.  They will be responsible for the strategic planning and operational deployment of all such I forces under their command. The viewpoint of the players is thus that of the Theatre naval commander of each side Germany out of Fleet Headquarters at Kiel or Allied Atlantic & Western Approaches Command out of Scapa Flow.  As such, the players may compose task groups, establish missions & destinations for those groups, and respond to operational events. Other operations that the theatre commander would not deal with directly, such as individual ship or task group movement, convoy logistics, & combat employment will be handled automatically by the computer.

2.0	GENERAL COURSE OF PLAY: The game is composed of 2 major sections, the start up of
the game and the game itself.  The start up lets the players begin a new game or resume a previous game that had been saved.  The game itself is played continuously, but in impulses segmented at 2 week intervals, while allowing player actions for specific events as they occur in response to particular actions of the opposing forces, as these actions become known.  At these 2 week break points first the Axis and then the Allied player will be given the opportunity to update themselves on the current situation and modify any standing orders they may have instituted.


3.0 GAME EQUIPMENT:

3.1 THE MAPS:

3.11  GENERAL: Two identical maps representing the Atlantic Ocean are included
with the game. Each player should take one of these and place it so that it
will be out of sight of the other player. These situation maps can be used to
record the current locations of friendly forces as well as known or suspected
locations for opposing units as well as weather situations and damaged port
facilities.

3.12    LOCATIONS ON THE MAP: The maps are broken down into a number of
irregularly sized areas, each of which is named and numbered.  In addition,
ports within each of these areas are indicated and have a named and lettered
box for each. Each of these unique number (for areas) or letter ; (for port)
designations are the code references to locations on the map that the computer
uses and all communications about specific areas or port must be made using
these designations. Thus a reference to the Iberian basin would be area 24
while a reference to Scapa Flow would be port P.

3.2  THE PLAYING PIECES: The playing pieces are the die cut counters. They
should be broken free from the frame to be used as individual pieces.  The
pieces are colored by nationality and by force represented.  Allied forces are
bright red, two shades of green, yellow, and two shades of blue. German forces
are tones of grey, bluegrey, and mauve. There are two types of pieces termed
units, those representing naval forces and those representing air forces.
These all have an image of the general type of vessel or aircraft they
represent and a letter code of the unit type (such as BB for battleship as
well as the name for the unit and a unique identity number that is used when
referring to that specific unit to the computer In addition, there are a
number of pieces termed markers which may be used for indicating possible
locations, weather, and keeping records which are termed markers.


4.0   GETTING STARTED:

4.1 BOOTING:  To boot the game you must have the computer indicated by the
label on the box.  In addition a disk drive is required. Simply place the disk
in the drive and turn on the computer, or turn on the computer and type the
boot code, or turn on the computer and type "RUN HELLO".  It is possible that
your computer may run on a different DOS than that in which the program is
written.  In a case where normal boot up as above does not work, consult your
DOS manual for how to boot up via your DOS conversion system.

4.2     NEW OR SAVED GAME: The program will ask you if you wish to start a new
game or restart an old saved game. Give an 'N' or 'O' as required. 'O' will
take you to the save game routine.

4.3     ONE OR TWO PLAYERS: When starting a game the computer will need to know how many people will play.  By selecting Computer Plays Allies or Computer Plays Axis, your opponent will be the computer. If playing against another player, select Both Sides Human. It is also possible to have the
computer play against itself by selecting that option.

4.4     SCENARIOS: Next the players may choice from one of 5 scenarios
to play. All scenarios start in February, 1940, but they differ in end date.
Indicate the selected scenario from the provided menu.

4.5     FORCE LEVELS: Finally the player will be asked to indicate the
starting force levels. These can reflect the historical situation, or several
variations. Players will find that the longer scenarios will be more balanced
if one of the variations is used.  After force levels are indicated, the
computer will set up the game.

4.6     STARTING POSITIONS: The computer will set up the game.  If players are
restarting a saved game the starting positions will be as when the saved game
was previously stopped. For a new game the computer will deploy the initial
forces.  Playing pieces should be deployed on the players' situation maps as
indicated by the Reports Segment.

4.7     UNIT DESIGNATIONS: Each player's units are given a unit type
abbreviation, as well as a name and identity number. These have the following
meanings: CV-aircraft carrier; BB-battleship; BC-battle cruiser; CA-heavy
cruiser; CL-light cruiser group; DD-destroyer group; SS-submarine group;
CVE-escort aircraft carrier group; E-escort group; MM-Amphibious group; F-fast
convoy; S-slow convoy; AIR-aircraft group.

4.8     ENTERING INFORMATION: In casual play the computer detects the
completion of each information entry by the player pressing the return or
entry key.  'Y' & 'N' are responses for Yes & No questions while digits are
used for number responses and Letters for lettered responses.  If just a
return or entry is indicated the computer will assume that no change from the
previous state is required. Note that all entries should be made in upper
case, These entries will move from a main menu to a subordinate menu or will
provide for specific selection of an option. When returning from a subordinate
menu to a main menu, pressing escape is used.  In all instances the available
entries will be listed on the screen.


5.0   THE ORDERS SEGMENT:

5.1  GENERAL: The first menu a player is presented with gives him a
choice of viewing reports or giving orders. This section covers the Orders
selection.  An escape entry while in either the Orders or Reports section will
bring the player back to this preliminary menu, allowing entry into either
selection.  During the Orders Segment of the player phase the player may give
orders to his forces. The Orders Segment phase for a player begins by
displaying the date time and a menu of the player's units to which orders may
be issued.  When selecting a unit a new menu will be displayed which will
contain only the orders which may be issued to that unit.  When entering an
order, the player may press escape to return to the menu of possible orders
without issuing the order that was in progress.  Note that players may go back
to specific units to change their orders any number of times without penalty.

5.2  AVAILABLE ORDERS:

5.21  PATROL:  The player will be asked to provide the area which is to be
patrolled (the Station), an area to be passed through en route to the station
(Proceed Via), and an area to pass through en route to the station (Return
Via). The computer calculates the shortest route from the unit's current
location to the Proceed Via area, thence to the station, to the Return Via
area, and so on, to the unit's base. The unit will proceed to the station, and
remain there until it has only enough endurance to return to base and then do
so.  An order may not be issued which exceeds the operational range of the
unit.  For AIR units the player need only give the station.  In instances
where it is not desired to have a specified mid point to a route, note that
the destination area should also be entered as the Proceed Via Area.

5.22  BARRIER:  This is as Patrol, except the player also indicates an area
For which the barrier is conducted.  The unit is more likely to find enemy
units moving from the patrol area into the area for which the barrier is
indicated.

5.23 JOIN GROUP:  This selection causes the unit to which it is issued to join
a specific group.  Groups are handy in that all units of a group will follow
the orders given to the specified leader of the group. To indicate the group
to be joined, the player must enter the ID number of the lead unit of the
group to be joined.  If the two units are in the same area, it joins
immediately. Otherwise, the player must give a sea area through which the
joining unit is to proceed to the rendezvous.  This area need not be on a
direct line between the unit and the group it is to join.  If the rendezvous
fails for any reason, the joining unit will wait in the area in which the
group was located when the rendezvous was ordered until it receives other
orders, or the rendezvous occurs.  It is also possible to have a group join
another group in the same manner, with the leader of the group to be joined
remaining the leader for the new larger group.  Note that, if a unit that is
part of a grou ven a separate order, it will cease to be a member of that
group and proceed independently.

5.24    ENTER ESCORT POOL: The unit is made available to be selected as escort
by any convoy forming in the port where the unit is located when ordered into
the escort pool.

5.25    ESCORT CONVOY: This is as for joining a group, except the unit
proceeds to the indicated convoy and joins it as an escort.

5.26    CHANGE BASE: The unit proceeds to the base indicated by the player
along the player specified route and rests there until new orders are
received.  To do the Torch landings with the Allied MM type units, a change
base order should be given to those units with the new base being Gibraltar.

5.27  CONDUCT AMPHIBIOUS OPS: The unit will proceed by the specified route to
an indicated port and attempt to capture it, This order may only be issued to
German MM units against Norwegian ports. Allied MM units are only used for the
Torch landings as a special case convoy.  In the case of MM units for either
player, when they reach their destination port the unit will cease to be
active and no longer be reported.

5.28(a) REST IN PORT: This cancels any other orders for a unit that is in
port, including orders placing the unit in the escort pool. This is also the
order that must be given to allow repairs to take place for damaged vessels
that have returned to port.

5.28(b) RETURN TO PORT: This cancels any other order for the unit and has the
unit return to base via the route specified by the player, if possible.

5.29  BECOME GROUP LEADER: This allows the player to reorganize the group of
which the unit is a member so that the unit becomes the group leader, or to
specify the leader of a newly formed group.


6.0	THE REPORTS SEGMENT:

6.1  GENERAL: When the player selects the Reports option , he is presented
with a list of report categories, which are detailed below.  When looking at
any menu, all valid choices are shown on the screen.  The player may press
escape to return to a higher menu, or select one of the options.  If no
options are listed, none are available.  When through looking at a report, the
player must press escape to return to a menu.

6.2 SELECTIONS:

6.11    UNITS BY NUMBER: The player is given a list of friendly units in play.
When a unit is selected, a report is shown giving the unit's mission, its
station, its base, and other applicable information such as current forces
composing the unit, current course and speed, etc.  The exact information
depends on the unit's current mission, location, and the general situation.

6.12    UNITS AT SEA BY AREA: The player is given a List of areas which
contain friendly units or which may be entered by bordering friendly ports.
The player selects an area, and is shown a menu of friendly units in the area.
When a unit is selected from this menu, a report is shown as described in 6.11
above.

6.13    UNITS IN PORT BY PORT: This produces results as in 6.12, but using a
list of friendly ports, rather than areas.

6.14    UNITS BY GROUP: The player is shown a menu giving all units which are
group leaders.  When a group leader is selected the player sees a report
showing units attached to and joining the group of that leader unit. The
player may select one of these units to see a report for that particular unit
as described in 6.11.

6.15    AREAS BY NUMBER: The player is given a list of all areas in which he
has units or which may be entered by bordering friendly ports. He may select
from this list to see a report showing the weather conditions in the selected
area and the friendly units it contains.

6.16    PORTS BY LETTER: This selection gives results as in 6.15, except a
list of friendly ports is given, and information shown relates to the port,
including units in the port and unallocated reinforcements now at the port
which will be assigned as reinforcements to any units in that port (this will
occur automatically).


7.0	THE ACTIVITY SEGMENT:

7.1     GENERAL: During the Activity segment both players will come to the
screen and resolution will occur.  Each player will have the opportunity,
under certain circumstances, to intervene in response to the activities
occurring.  Any of the events below may occur any number of times over the
resolution of each two-week period.

7.2     MESSAGES: During resolution certain messages will appear on the
screen.  Some will be accurate, and some will be false. These indicate the
formation of convoys leaving from certain ports, the arrival of convoys at
certain points (including current Allied victory point levels), and attacks by
U-Boats on convoys. U-Boat attacks occur automatically, without player
intervention.

7.3     INTERVENTION:  Units on patrol or barrier operations may locate
hostile units. Units with any orders may be located by enemy units. When this
occurs each player, starting with the player whose unit did the locating, will
be given a chance to intervene.

7.31    SIGHTING: The sighting report shows all known information about the
enemy forces sighted.  When entering an escape the player will go to suggested
Tactics.

7.32    TACTICS: The player must, when involved in a sighting, select a tactic
from a menu of:  EVADE: attempt to escape the enemy units;   SHADOW: Do not
force an engagement but try to maintain contact;  ENGAGE: Try to bring the
enemy to battle.  Relative success at these tactics is based on relative
speeds, local time of day, weather conditions, and various random factors.
After entering the chosen tactic with a return the player will go to the
Interception option.

7.33    INTERCEPTION: The player is provided with a list of all friendly units
in adjacent areas and ports.  Each unit selected from this list will be
ordered to intercept the hostile sighted unit(a). That is, it will proceed at
top speed to the area in which the sighted forces are currently located and
attempt to engage it. If it reaches the area before the enemy leaves, it
stands a better than normal chance of locating enemy.  If it fails, it will
patrol the interception area.  Once all desired interception orders have been
given, enter an escape to proceed.

7.4  COMBAT:  Combat occurs once both sides have selected tactics and ordered
any interceptions.  Message reports may be given to both players reflecting
the course of the action, so both players should watch the screen at this
time. After completion of each particular combat the Activity segment resumes
until all activities are completed.


8.0  REINFORCEMENT & EXTERNAL EVENTS: When the Activity segment concludes
External Events of importance may be displayed for the players. There are only
2 events of importance.  One is the fall of France, which brings the ports of
France under Axis control.  The other is the fall of Norway.  This is
contingent upon the Axis having taken two of the Norwegian ports by amphibious
assault.  After this has occurred, other ports of Norway may fall under German
control at various times and will be so reported.  At the end of external
events (or the end of the Activity segment if no external events occur) the
victory point level of the players will be displayed. Following this the
computer will update forces for both sides by assigning reinforcements. Small
vessels are assigned automatically while major forces represented by new
counters (from those not yet in play) will be placed into play and become
listed as available to the player during his next reports segment.


9.0  ENDING OR SAVING THE GAME: The game ends automatically at the conclusion
of the scenario in play. However, you need not play a scenario to completion
during a single sitting.   At the conclusion of reinforcement the players will
be given a chance to save the game for restart at a later time.  To save the
game you MUST have available another disk that has been previously initialized
or formatted. The computer will prompt you through the save routine. The save
routine uses the same drive as the program disk.  Be sure to remove the
program disk when prompted to do so and insert the disk on which the game will
be saved.  CAUTION: There is insufficient space on the program disk to save a
game. Do not attempt to do so. A spare disk can save up to 20 games in
progress.  Be sure to use one, After saving the game the computer can be shut
down or play may be continued on the next turn of the game just saved and
still in progress.  After a scenario ends the players may examine final
reports to determine the closing status of their forces.


10.0 VICTORY: At the end of the game the players will be presented with the
final victory point totals. These will be the Allied and Axis victory points,
as welt as an Axis victory point handicap. The total of the Axis points and
the handicap is compared to the Allied sum.  If the totals are within 500
points, the game is a draw. If one player is ahead of the other by in excess
of 500 points, that player wins. The computer automatically calculates victory
points during the game.  Victory points are awarded for the following: 1, Each
Allied merchant vessel in a convoy that arrives in Liverpool or Murmansk
(variable with date, scenario & arrival location, with Murmansk earning more
points during the winter). 2. Each Allied MM unit moved from North America to
Gibraltar (for the Torch operation). 3. Successful Axis amphibious operations
against Norway. 4. Axis SS Gruppes operating in areas 1-5 from January 1942
through June 1942, if the U.S. has entered the game.  In general the handicap
s ystem for the Axis gives them points at weekly intervals for their simple
existence as an opposing force, However the Allies earn large numbers of point
for their convoy results. To win the German cannot rely on the handicap. He
must actively threaten the shipping lanes with every surface ship, submarine,
and aircraft at his disposal.

11.0	DESIGNER'S NOTES ON PLAY:

11.1    THE ALLIES: The Allied forces have two problems. First, the Battle
Squadrons must operate to contain German surface raiders, which can do very
nasty things to the convoy routes if allowed into the shipping lanes. Second,
something must be done about German submarine forces operating in the
Atlantic. The first problem is very straight-forward. The second is far more
difficult. While some air coverage may be offered deep in the Atlantic, it is
in general far more effective nearer the bases. Surface units may be used as
ersatz hunter-killer groups until CVE's  are available, but this has limited
usefulness. The historical solution is to place every free unit into the
escort pool, but that will start to impair anti-surface blockade in the early
game, when it can least be afforded. The Germany Attacks scenario is
definitely a hang-on problem, as is the England Stands Alone scenario, though
to a lesser extent. With the longer scenarios it becomes easier as German
raiders sall destroyed. The "Happy Time" can be a good chance to try to put a
dent into German sub forces aimed at otherwise cheap victory points off the
U.S. east coast.  Both air and surface forces should be assigned to try to
sink subs while the opportunity is there -- there are plenty of air bases in
the area for that purpose. Some simple rules of thumb: Unless you are hunting
a known German raider, keep spread out in single unit forces (two battleships
and a half dozen destroyers can look after themselves). Keep escorts light
too. Covering every convoy is more important than putting a lot of cover on
some.  Remember that your opponent can just ignore the heavily escorted ones.
Air units are the most responsive, so they should be used to cover problem
areas on the convoy routes. Air power is your best antisubmarine force, so
leave the surface raiders to the battleships.

11.2    THE AXIS: You must not succumb to the temptation to form all your
surface units into a grand fleet and go off to contest the high seas.  The
Germans have some fine ships, but they are few and far between.  You might win
some success in the shorter scenarios just through surprise, but remember that
each of those British BB units represents two full battleships, while a pocket
battleship is just a heavy cruiser with great styling.  In the longer
scenarios, you must concentrate on maintaining an effective threat. To do this
send your raiders out on short cruises at odd intervals.  Your U-Boats will
score moat of your points, or more accurately deny the Allies moat of theirs,
but you still want to distract the Allied player so that he cannot concentrate
all his resources on escort.  The force selection that eliminates U.S.
participation will vastly improve your U-Boat performance by denying the
British several critical air bases, a number of major units, and a lot of
escort re-enfo ments.  On the minus, the potential points for U.S. coastal
operations in the first half of 1942 are lost.  This means a tot of effort
must be put into the North Atlantic.  The Enhanced forces option gives you two
more fine battleships and two aircraft carriers, but it still does not make
the German surface fleet -something to go hunting the Home fleet with on a
regular basis, though one good sally becomes possible and the Murmansk convoys
can be heavily depleted.  The Norwegian operation is important both for
victory points and to provide bases for raiders and air power.  Air power is
most effective from Norway against the Murmansk convoys, but can be useful for
observation of Allied operations as well.  In a no-U.S. game, the Murmansk
convoys will not occur, so air units may be used to hunt British battleships
with some effectiveness. Remember, however, that air power effectiveness is
inversely proportional to distance from base, so try to keep close to
Norwegian bases.  If the Norwe gian operation fails, you are in a lot of
trouble, since everything will have to shift to French bases. These are
further from the trans-Atlantic convoy lanes, and the Murmansk convoys will
have a field day.

  Les Howie & Stephen Newberg
