The Odd History of the First Erotic Computer Game

The Atlantic Laine Nooney The Atlantic, December 2, 2014

On October 5, 1981, Time magazine ran a story called “Software for the
Masses”—a retrospective meditation on how computing became personal. If
1970s computer ownership had been limited to hobbyists who built and
programmed their own machines, the 1980s were reeling in a new world of
potential, non-specialist users: small business owners, housewives,
children. The possibilities were endless, and for many consumers,
overwhelming.

“Software for the Masses” might have been an otherwise arid tech story,
buried and forgettable. But it ran with a warm, risqué photo of three
brunettes in an outdoor hot tub, their breasts bobbing and nudging the
waterline. This image was the promotional photography for the “computer
fantasy game” Softporn, in which “players seek to seduce three women,
while avoiding hazards, such as getting killed by a bouncer in a disco.”
For $29.95 (plus $1 shipping and handling) a company named On-Line
Systems would mail out this “funny, provocative, challenging adventure
game for adults only!” on a single 5.25-inch floppy disk. Time reported
that 4,000 copies had already been sold, making each and every purchaser
the proud, unsuspecting owner of America’s first commercially-released
pornographic computer game.

As an erotic episode, Softporn would leave much to the imagination.
Softporn was a text-based adventure game, meaning it had no graphics.
Upon booting the floppy disk, the player was given control of a
“puppet,” a human male through which the player executes textual
commands. PLAY SLOTS. BUY WHISKEY. WEAR CONDOM. SCREW HOOKER. Softporn
is set in a vague, 70s-infused urban dystopia entirely comprised of a
bar, a casino, and a disco. Computer games had escorted players into
underground caves, realms of starry space, and sport fields of every
kind since the 1960s. Softporn captures a different kind of aspirational
landscape, a contorted, pulpy vision of a bachelor’s night on the town.

Softporn was the creation of Massachusetts-based programmer Chuck
Benton, an unlikely man to herald the erotic software revolution. A
self-described “conservative New Englander,” Benton was a single guy in
his late twenties at the time, and he initially designed the game as an
exercise to teach himself programming on the Apple II. He intended the
game as satire, a self-amused catalog of the unique sufferings of his
species—the embarrassment of buying a pack of condoms, or accidentally
going home with someone who ties you up and steals your cash (Benton
claims parts of the game were drawn from his own experience, but has
never fessed up to which parts).

Benton wasn’t trying to innovate on the text adventure genre so much as
he was iterating from a pattern of pre-existing games. Many of the
game’s cleverest features have the quality of introductory programming
exercises: playing the blackjack and slot machine simulators, spending
and earning money, a question and answer scenario using basic
programming routines, and graffiti on a bathroom wall represented like
ASCII art. The game was a silly thing, programmed and play-tested on the
weekends, but Benton's guy friends took a liking to it and encouraged
him to publish it.

There’s a gawkiness to Benton’s lines and lines of textual description,
from the “swinging singles disco” full of “guys and gals doin’ the best
steps in town,” to the prostitute’s bedroom, where “the bed’s a mess and
the hooker’s about the same!” For all of Softporn’s exhausting
chauvinism and wearied sexism, the game is absent of actual obscenity,
and earnest to a fault. Even Eve, the final girl sought by the player,
is sketched in little more than boyish exuberance: “What a beautiful
face!!! She’s leaning back in the jacuzzi with her eyes closed and seems
extremely relaxed. The water is bubbling up around her….A ‘10’!! She’s
so beautiful………….A guy really could fall in love with a girl like this.”

What is remarkable about Softporn isn't that it existed, but that it was
commercially sold. Erotic content had circulated freely on mainframes
and minicomputers for decades, whether in the form of dirty joke
generators or ASCII print outs of the Playboy bunny head. Raunchy code
on a mainframe was available to any curious, specialist user poking
around in the file systems. It wasn’t unlike a pin-up girl on the office
wall: It could affirm the standard notions of what was and wasn't
desirable among male co-workers, but wasn’t necessarily intended to
provoke sexual activity. In contrast, microcomputers had an unforeseen
potential for privacy, individual use, and personal ownership of code.
Eroticism in this context could be illicit and furtive. Softporn was the
computational equivalent of a Penthouse stash.

Benton’s initial attempts to sell the game himself faltered in the face
of distribution problems: Computer enthusiast magazines, the only
network connecting a large but dispersed population of potential buyers,
turned down his ads, unwilling to risk already slim profit margins on
potentially offensive material. (Such bottlenecks eventually inspired
innovations like the 1981 Dirty Book, a black-market-style catalog of
adult programs that was advertised in computer magazines—selling a
pamphlet of porn software was considerably less objectionable than
selling the software itself, it seems.) Benton’s independent sales were
painfully hand-to-hand, conducted from vendor booths at trade shows and
computer fairs.

The boost Benton needed came when Ken Williams, one of the Apple II
world’s youngest, most recklessly ambitious software titans, picked up a
copy at a trade show. Williams was the 26-year-old president and
co-founder of On-Line Systems, a software company he and his wife
Roberta had launched with the 1980 release of their graphical adventure
game Mystery House (Ken programmed the game but Roberta designed it,
making her one of the first female computer game designers in the
world). Since then, the Williamses had fostered an indomitable series of
graphical adventure games and arcade copycats, long forgotten titles
like The Wizard and the Princess and Missile Defense. Ken, along with a
handful of other late-twenties fast risers in the Apple II world,
experienced their fame as an unstoppable ascent for the best and the
brightest. In other words, Ken had both the self-importance and the
naivety to put his well-respected company label on a sex game.

On-Line Systems’ contribution to Softporn’s success went beyond the
simplicity of a licensing agreement. The game’s visual lacquer, that hot
tub photo better remembered today than the game itself, was all Ken’s
idea—it was even staged in the Williamses’ redwood paneled hot tub on
the ground floor of their family home. The female models were all
company employees: Diane Siegal, On-Line's production manager, holds a
half-eaten apple in a coy pun on Wozniak's forbidden fruit; in the
middle, Susan Davis, On-Line's bookkeeper and wife of programmer Bob
Davis; and on the right was Roberta herself, looking as if she had all
eternity to meet your gaze. The gentleman in the photo is Rick Chipman,
a waiter from The Broken Bit, a restaurant just down the road on
California State Route 41.

The photo itself was shot by Brian Wilkinson, an editor at the local
newspaper who knew Ken as a guy around town, the kind of guy he might
drink beers with. “I’m no Ansel Adams,” he told Ken Williams, “but I can
take a photo.” Wilkinson shot multiple reels of Kodachrome and
Ektachrome film, but only a handful of those original photos survive.
These sparse vignettes give dimension to a process, rather than the
singular, famed result that crops up under a Google search. Afternoon
fades to sunset fades to evening. The women grow bored and irritated. An
apple is slowly eaten over the course of the shoot. A backdrop is
propped up, made from the round lids to the pool. At some point the
Apple II was either brought in or taken out. No one in that hot tub
imagined Time magazine on the other end of the lens. These people were
friends, screwing around in the times before Twitter and Instagram,
doing regrettable things they couldn’t really fathom the ultimate reach
of. There could be no better testament to just how small, insular, and
utterly naive the early independent microcomputer software scene was, a
corporate culture wrought from the volatile mixture of inexperience and
exponential growth.

The hot tub ad first ran in the September 1981 issue of Softalk, an
Apple II enthusiast magazine that was a major advertising venue for
On-Line Systems, and instantly became a lightning rod of controversy (as
instantly as anything could happen in the days of paperbound magazines
and mailed letters). Notably, the controversy was not just about
Softporn. From September 1981 onward, Softalk, like other computer
magazines, was increasingly accepting the advertising dollars offered by
other “adult-themed” software products, like the sex scenario generator
Interlude and prostitution business simulator Street Life. For almost a
year, the pages of Softalk’s “Open Discussion” section was a platform
for one of the most involved, contentious, long-ranging debates to ever
take place on the subject of technology, obscenity, and equality in
early game and computer culture.

The earliest responses arrived in the November 1981 issue of Softalk.
Richard Gillett of Manhattan, Kansas, accused On-Line of turning the
pages of Softalk into “cheesecake,” espousing that:

"There are many [Apple] owners with children who read their issue of the
magazine. Finding an ad like yours in the magazine must certainly put
these parents off. It is bad enough that their children's television
viewing hours are riddled with sexual themes and suggestions. Now a
child can't even attempt to work with a computer—an essentially sexless
tool—without being besieged with these unnecessary ads."

Under Softalk's pen, “the pure science of computer programming” was
exposed for what it had always been: socially embedded, politically
fraught, brittle in its appeal to scientific objectivity. The dialogue
around Softporn was perhaps the first time a cultural debate happened
within a microcomputing and gaming community itself. Unlike the moral
panics that shadowed Custer’s Revenge or Death Race, Softalk’s
letter-writers were both consumers and producers of the fledging
microcomputer industry, advertisers who were also always its
subscribers. In written responses to the ad, readers were sorting
through just what they thought their industry should look like, but also
questions that were far bigger than microcomputers or games: What is
this technology for? What is its potential? How will such images affect
the people who see them? What is our responsibility to public good
versus individual freedom?

Softalk’s response is a stiff aperitif to the gaming debates of today.
What Softporn proves, this most ridiculous, this most unfortunate, this
so pitifully blank entry in the history of games, is that
friction—between consumers, between industry and consumer, between
industry and concerned public—is painful in its moment, but 35 years
later only marks how we make new habits and strange technologies
familiar. The letters in Softalk, in some backwards way, show that the
world of computing was once more diverse than we’ve ever imagined. Women
were teaching computer literacy classes in the interstate outskirts of
Atlanta, Georgia. Men were defending an ideology of computers as
“sexless tools.” Softporn wasn’t the distillation of computing’s
misogynist kernel. In 1981 the microcomputer and its allied industries
were not already destined to become a space where women are violently
harassed for discussing inequity, or simply presumed to have no native
interest in technology. Its future was not yet determined, and need not
have played out the way it did.

Softporn was pulled within months from On-Line’s advertised catalog, but
the circulation of the game was sustained for years between friends and
computer communities. Within a year, On-Line Systems would take venture
capital and rebrand itself anyway as Sierra On-Line, a company now
better remembered for games like King’s Quest, Phantasmagoria, and Space
Quest. Sierra On-Line never sold another text adventure. Benton stayed
on with the company for a couple years programming ports, but future
games of his own didn’t quite get developed (including a female version,
which is mentioned in the Time article). He started his own tech company
in 1985, and never made another game.

Softporn itself would find resurrection in the festive graphical world
of Sierra’s Leisure Suit Larry series, first released in 1987. The
game’s designer, Al Lowe, added character and color, dialog and
description, but Leisure Suit Larry is, almost puzzle for puzzle,
Softporn. Leisure Suit Larry spawned six games total under Sierra’s wing
and several remakes, “unofficial” sequels, and fan reboots. It is a
property that has aged poorly into the 21st century though, repeating
the same predictable puns and juvenile obsessions. Benton never designed
the game to last.

In some sense, Softporn is least interesting as a game, and most
interesting as a piece of social theater. While Softporn seemingly
affirms every long-suffering trope gaming has to offer—its latent
misogyny, its middling cultural stakes, its limp internal humor—it was
also developed under shifting social and spatial constraints within an
emerging populist computer culture. Softporn flexed a predictable,
uninspired muscle against disorienting technological and social
circumstances that we long ago forgot were ever disorienting. No one
much knew what to do with microcomputers when they lugged them into a
garage, basement, or kitchen. Their uses were always equal parts
technological utopia and domestic banality (hence the early 1980s
fondness for digital recipe organizers). The debate and uproar hounding
Softporn’s distribution and reception illuminates corners of computer
history left dark by the presumptive wisdom that modern computing fell
from the tree of Adam.

see
https://www.theatlantic.com/technology/archive/2014/12/the-odd-history-
of-the-first-erotic-computer-game/383114/
