
Carrier Force



1.0  INTRODUCTION
     Carrier Force is an operational level game featuring combat between
     American and Japanese carrier task forces in 1942. Included are scenarios
     covering the battles of CORAL SEA, MIDWAY, EASTERN SOLOMONS and SANTA
     CRUZ.

1.1  Description of Action
     Each game turn represents one hour of actions. Actions consist of
     maneuvering task forces, launching search, patrol and bomber missions,
     arming & fueling aircraft, recovering aircraft, moving air groups and
     resolving combat situations.

1.2  Talking to the Computer
     To enter a response to the computer that consists of numbers (such as
     ship identification numbers) type the number into the computer and press
     the <RETURN> key. To select a routine from a menu or answer a Yes/No
     question, just press the desired key. TO EXIT A ROUTINE WHERE THE EXIT
     COMMAND IS NOT SPECIFIED, PRESS <Q> THEN <RETURN>.  Some menus do not
     require the user to press <RETURN> after pressing the <Q> key.

1.3  Saving a Game
     At the end of each game turn the computer will allow the Player(s) to
     save the game in progress. You will need a scratch disk to store the
     saved game data.  Apple Save-Game disks may be initialized for SSI use
     during the game by following instructions included in the game program.
     Atari games may be saved on any properly initialized Atari diskette. Once
     a game is saved You will be able to restart it at the point you left off.
     When restarting a saved game you must set the correct scenario, solitaire
     level and number of players on the opening menu.

1.4  The Map
     There are two maps included with the game. The Midway scenario employs a
     map of the Central Pacific centering on the Island of Midway. All other
     scenarios use a map of the Southwest Pacific centering on the Solomon
     Islands. Movement around the maps is controlled by a hexagon grid system
     (31 X 32 hexes.) with each hexagon representing 50 nautical miles.

1.5  Starting the Game (Apple DOS 3.2 or 3.3)
     To begin the game, boot your game disk and the game will begin
     automatically. If you are using an Apple II with Pascal, you  must first
     use your BASICS disk.  If you are using an Apple III, you must first go
     into Apple II emulation mode.


2.0  GENERAL DESCRIPTION

2.1 Parts Inventory:
     A. Game box
     B. Rule Book
     C. 5 1/4" game disk
     D. Two map data cards

2.2 Abbreviations:
     Abbreviations used in the game are listed below.

     CV   aircraft carrier         MG   main guns
     CVL  light aircraft carrier   AA   anti-aircraft guns
     BB   battleship               TT   torpedoes
     CA   heavy cruiser            AM   bombardment ammunition
     CL   light cruiser             SP   seaplane
     CLAA anti-aircraft cruiser    MS   maximum speed
     CS   seaplane carrier         AS   assault points
     AV   seaplane tender          DM   damage percentage
     DD   destroyer                FL   fire level
     DE   destroyer escort         CAP  base capacity
     APD  patrol boat              A/C  aircraft
     ML   minelayer                OL   operation limit
     TR   transport                OU   operations used
     TK   tanker/oiler             BO   bomber ordnance
     SS   submarine                TF   task force


3.0  SEQUENCE OF PLAY
     CARRIER FORCE is a two-sided game: American vs. Japanese. The American
     forces must be commanded by a human player. The Japanese forces may be
     commanded by either a human or the computer.

3.1  Scenario Selection Phase
     During the scenario selection phase, the player(s) select a scenario and
     determine the conditions under which the game will be played. On the
     Apple version the set-up may be changed by entering the following numbers:

     (1) New Game or Saved Game
     (2) 1 Disk Drive or 2 Disk Drives
     (3) Solitaire or 2 players
     (4) Solitaire Level of Difficulty

     The scenario may be altered by entering the following numbers

     (5) Coral Sea
     (6) Midway
     (7) Eastern Solomons

3.2  Historical Set-Up
     At the start of each game the computer will assign all ships and aircraft
     to their historical locations prior to the battle.

3.3  Random Set-Up
     The players may randomize the set-up somewhat in all scenarios except
     CORAL SEA. In the MIDWAY scenario both American and Japanese carrier TFs
     will have their historical locations altered. In EASTERN SOLOMONS and
     SANTA CRUZ all Japanese TFs will have their locations altered.

3.4  Sequence of Play
     1. American TF Adjustment Phase
     2. Japanese TF Adjustment Phase
     3. Japanese Adjust TF Heading
     4. Japanese Launch Air Missions
     5. Japanese Arm & Fuel Aircraft
     6. Japanese Land Aircraft
     7. Japanese Move Air Missions
     8. American Radar Report
     9. American Adjust TF Heading
    10. American Launch Air Missions
    11. American Arm & Fuel Aircraft
    12. American Land Aircraft
    13. American Move Air Missions
    14. Combat Resolution Phase
    15. Save-Game Phase

3.5  Keeping Time

     Each game turn represents one hour. At the start of each turn the clock,
     calendar and weather are adjusted to reflect the passage of time and the
     changing battle conditions. Daylight hours are 600 to 1800 (inclusive)


4.0  TASK FORCE ADJUSTMENT PHASE
     During the task force adjustment phase, the computer will display a menu
     listing two options for adjusting the composition of your task forces and
     five options for viewing the current status of your forces. To enter the
     desired routine, just press the corresponding numbered key.

4.1  Dividing Task Forces
     Enter the number of the task force you wish to divide. The computer will
     list the ships in the selected task force and display their maximum
     speed, damage and fire levels. The maximum number of task forces that the
     Japanese player may use is equal to 10 minus the number of Japanese land
     bases for that scenario. The maximum number of task forces that the
     American player may use is equal to 9 minus the number of American land
     bases for that scenario. If you are currently using the maximum number of
     task forces then the computer will not allow you to divide a task force.
     If you currently have less than the maximum number then the computer will
     display the number of the new task force you are creating. Enter the ID
     number for each ship you wish to transfer to the new task force.  When
     you have concluded your transfers just press <RETURN> to exit the
     routine. If you are currently using fewer than the maximum number of task
     forces then the divide task force routine may be used to 'scuttle'
     crippled ships.  Just enter the letter "S" following the ID number of the
     ship you are transferring (entering a "5S" would scuttle ship #5).

4.2  Transferring Ships
     Enter the numbers of the "gaining" and "losing" task forces. The two task
     forces must occupy the same hexagon on the map. The procedure for
     transferring ships is the same as de- scribed in 4.1.  A task force may
     never contain more than 20 ships. When a ship transfer occurs, the
     gaining task forces movement points will be adjusted to equal that of
     either the gaining or losing task force (whichever is lowest).

4.3  Ending the Game
     Both players should agree before ending the game The computer will
     display the final score and a list of all ships sunk during play.

4.4  The Map Display
     The maps used in Carrier Force employ a hexagon grid 32 hexes high by 31
     hexes wide.  Only a fraction of the map (7 hexes high by 13 hexes wide)
     can be viewed at one time.  By pressing the keys 1-6 the cursor can be
     moved around the map (1-N, 2-NE, 3-SE, 4-S, 5-SW, 6-NW). If the cursor is
     moved to the edge of the display then the map display will scroll to
     reveal the hidden portions of the map. American task force symbols will
     be colored blue and Japanese task force symbols will be colored orange
     (on the Apple computer American task forces that occupy an island or base
     hex will be colored purple, Japanese task forces that occupy an island or
     base hex will be colored green) American and Japanese TFs stacked
     together will have a WHITE symbol. To check the friendly task force
     numbers in the hex occupied by the cursor press the (8) LOOK key. To
     return to the main menu Press the (Q)EXIT key.


5.0  TASK FORCE MOVEMENT
     Task force movement occurs at the end of each game turn after all combat
     has been resolved.  A task force that has accumulated 50 or more movement
     points will move one hex (the direction of movement is determined by the
     task force heading). A task force that moves will have 50 subtracted from
     its movement point total.

5.1  Fleet Speed
     At the start of each turn a task force will gain movement points equal to
     its fleet speed. The fleet speed will be equal to 30 OR the maximum speed
     of the slowest ship in the task force, which ever is lower.

5.2  Loss of Movement Points
     During the course of each turn a task force may perform certain actions
     that will cause it to LOSE movement points.  A task force that changes
     heading will lose 50% of its movement points for each compass point shift
     in direction (the movement point total will never be reduced below the
     TFs FLEET SPEED when changing direction) A task force will lose movement
     points if it contains aircraft carriers that launch or recover aircraft
     AND the task force is not moving in the same direction that the wind is
     blowing FROM.  If the task force heading is one compass point different
     from the wind direction (example: wind is blowing from the NE and the
     task is moving N) it will lose 5% of its movement points for each
     aircraft that is launched or landed in the task force. If the task force
     heading is more than one compass point different from the wind direction
     it will lose 10% of its movement points for each aircraft that is
     launched or landed in the task force.  This movement loss is due to the
     need for carriers to turn into the wind whenever they launch aircraft,
     thus preventing their task force from moving forward at full speed.

5.3  Movement Restrictions
     A task force may never move through a white hexside, but instead will
     continue to accumulate movement points up to a maximum of 79.  A task
     force may move off the edge of the map (it will not be allowed to
     return).


6.0  LAUNCHING AIR MISSIONS
     Land bases and aircraft carriers may launch fighter and bomber
     missions.Land bases and Japanese BB, CA, CL, CS and AV type ships may
     launch seaplane missions.  Each player may have a maximum of 20 air
     missions active at any one time.

6.1  Seaplane Missions
     A seaplane mission consists of one seaplane with the single function of
     searching for enemy ships. Ship launched seaplanes have an endurance of 6
     turns.  Land based seaplanes have an endurance of 18 turns.  Seaplanes
     may only be recovered by the ship/base from which they were launched.
     Launching or recovering seaplanes does not count against a bases
     operation limit.

6.2  Combat Missions
     The type of mission that may be flown by combat aircraft is determined by
     the type of aircraft included and/or the type of ordinance being carried.
     Listed below are the types of missions and their descriptions.

     F (fighter patrol) Consists, entirely of fighter type aircraft.  Used to
     protect friendly bases or task forces.

     AS (anti-ship) Consists of bombers carrying torpedoes and/or armor
     piercing bombs.  May not be used to attack enemy bases.  May include a
     fighter escort.

     HE (high-explosive) Consists of bombers carrying high explosive bombs.
     Best suited for attacking enemy bases.  May attack enemy ships at reduced
     effectiveness.  May include a fighter escort.

     N (not armed) Consists of unarmed bombers that have completed/aborted
     their mission or were launched for search only.  May include a fighter
     escort. Also may consist of unarmed Judy reconnaissance planes without a
     fighter escort.

     In order to launch an AS mission, the bombers must have been readied
     during a previous turn with AS ordnance. In order to launch an H E
     mission, the bombers must have been readied during a previous turn with
     HE ordnance.

6.3  Operation Limits
     Each base and carrier is assigned a limit to the number of aircraft it
     may launch and land in one turn (each launched or landed equals one
     flight operation). Carriers have a flexible operation limit that varies
     with the carrier TF heading in relation to the wind direction.  The land
     base operation limits never change. If a carrier TF heading is TWO or
     more compass points different from the wind direction then the carrier
     must conform to its MINIMUM OPERATION LIMIT for that turn.  If a carrier
     TF heading is ONE compass point different from the wind direction then
     the carrier must conform to its INTERMEDIATE OPERATION LIMIT for that
     turn. If a carrier TF heading is the same as the wind direction then the
     carrier must conform to its MAXIMUM OPERATION LIMIT for that turn. The
     intermediate operation limit will always be DOUBLE the minimum operation
     limit.  The maximum operation limit will always be TRIPLE the minimum
     operation limit. Listed below are the MINIMUM operation limits for
     carriers included in the game:

     Akagi     12        Lexington      12
     Kaga      12        Saratoga       12
     Hiryu     12        Yorktown       12
     Soryu     12        Enterprise     12
     Shokaku   12        Hornet         12
     Zuikaku   12        Wasp           11
     Junyo      9
     Shoho      6
     Zuiho      6
     Ryujo      6
     Hosho      3

     If for any reason during a turn an aircraft carrier is unable to conduct
     further air operations, then its operations used (OU) will be set to 99.

6.4  Forming Air Missions
     Air missions may be formed from available seaplanes or readied combat
     aircraft. lt is possible to form a new mission from one carrier/base and
     then reinforce it with aircraft from another carrier/base within the same
     hex. When reinforcing a mission that has been in the air for one or more
     turns the reinforcing aircraft will be assumed to have been in the air as
     long as the original aircraft. Bombers carrying AS ordnance may not be
     combined in the same mission as bombers carrying HE ordnance. Air
     missions cannot be split up after they have formed. Large air missions
     will suffer a movement point loss on the turn they are launched. Missions
     that have been in the air for one or more turns will suffer no movement
     loss if reinforced. There is a loss of one movement point for
     approximately every 15 planes in the mission (this will vary randomly)
     plus the loss of one MP automatically on the first turn a mission is in
     the air. A maximum of 3 movement points may be lost in this manner.


7.0  ARMING & FUELING AIRCRAFT
     Combat aircraft must be armed & fueled (readied) and moved onto the
     deck/runway before they may be launched on air missions.

7.1  Bomber Ordnance Selection
     A bomber ordnance selection (AS, HE or N) must be made for each carrier
     and base.  All bombers readied on a carrier or base will be armed with
     the selected ordnance type.

7.2  Deck/Runway Capacity
     The deck/runway capacity for a carrier/base represents the maximum number
     of aircraft that may be readied at one time (readied aircraft are always
     considered to be on the deck/runway). The deck/runway capacity is equal
     to the carrier/base MAXIMUM OPERATION LIMIT.

7.3  Removing Aircraft From the Deck/Runway
     Readied aircraft may be removed from the deck/runway.  Enter the READY
     AIRCRAFT routine and type a minus number for the quantity of each type of
     aircraft you wish to un-ready.


8.0  AIR MOVEMENT
     During the air movement phase, air missions may move, search, initiate
     combat and/or enter a landing pattern. Air missions movement is completed
     sequentially according to air mission number.

8.1  Air Mission Status Display
     Prior to moving each air mission, the players may view the status display
     for that mission.  The status display lists the data:
          (1) mission location
          (2) mission number
          (3) time in the air
          (4) ordnance carried by each aircraft
          (5) ordnance carried by each aircraft type
          (6) air time remaining for each aircraft type
     For bomber type missions you will be allowed to jettison ordnance before
     moving the air mission. This increases the air units movement allowance
     by 1.

8.2  Air Move Display
     After exiting the mission status display, the map will be drawn on the
     screen with the cursor indicating the current location of the air
     mission. The menu at the bottom of the screen will indicate the players
     options:
     (1) move north
     (2) move northeast
     (3) move southeast
     (4) move south
     (5) move southwest
     (6) move northwest
     (7) land
     (8) search current hex using all remaining move points
     (9) identify TF numbers of friendly TFs in same hex
     (0) search current hex using only 1 move point

     Also displayed is the air mission's X/Y LOCATION coordinates and its
     remaining MOVEMENT POINTS. Seaplane (SP) missions that select option (7)
     will land immediately if their home base/ship is in the same hex. Other
     missions that select option (7) will enter a landing pattern if a
     friendly base is in the same hex.

8.3  Searching
     Each time an air mission moves into a hex it will search for enemy TFs in
     that hex.  An air mission may search its current hex without moving by
     using the SEARCH options (8) or (0). In 0% overcast weather an air
     mission has a 50% chance of locating each enemy TF in the hex for each
     movement point it spends searching that hex (100% in a base/island hex).
     The 50% chance of locating assumes 20 ships in the TF.  For smaller TFs,
     the chance maybe as low as 40%. In addition, bad weather will further
     lower the % chance of spotting enemy TFs. Only HE missions may locate
     (and attack) enemy bases.  Air missions may fly at night, however no
     searching will occur.

8.4  Sighting Reports
     When an air mission locates an enemy TF the player will receive a
     "sighting report."  The sighting reports lists the ship type
     abbreviations for each ship sighted. Sighting reports will not be
     entirely accurate. Sighting reports will not be received if non-bomber
     missions locate an enemy TF that had been previously located in the same
     turn. Bomber missions will be given the option to declare an attack after
     sighting an enemy TF.

8.5  Engaging Enemy Aircraft
     For each movement point an air mission expends in a hex containing enemy
     aircraft, there is a chance of initiating air-to-air combat.  The chance
     of initiating combat varies with the size of friendly and enemy air
     missions and the weather.  Air-to-air combat will only occur if one of
     the airmissions involved is a fighter patrol (F). If a fighter mission
     expends movement points in a hex containing enemy aircraft, then it may
     only engage the enemy missions armed with bombs.  If a non-fighter
     mission expends move points in a hex containing enemy aircraft, then it
     may only engage the enemy fighter missions in the hex.  When opposing air
     missions engage in combat, the mission with the fewest aircraft will be
     unable to move any further that turn.

8.6  Movement Points
     An air mission assumes the speed of the slowest aircraft type included in
     the mission.  One movement point is subtracted from this speed if any of
     the aircraft in the mission are carrying bombs or torpedoes.  If a bomber
     mission declares an attack before it has used all of its movement points,
     then the unused points will be added to its next turns move. Listed below
     are the maximum speeds of the aircraft in the game

     ZEKE      4    SBD       4
     VAL       4    SB2U      3
     KATE      4    TBD       3
     BETTY     4    TBF       4
     NELL      3    B26       4
     JUDY      4    B25       4
     F4F       4    B17       4
     F2A       4    A24       4
     P39       5    SEAPLANE  3

(See illustration for following example)
(1) Form 20 SBD Plane strike.  Loss of 1 MP due to size of strike. Automatic
    loss of 1 MP from take-off (total loss of 2MP).
(2) Movement during first turn in air
(3) Movement during second turn in air.  One MP is expended over the enemy TF
    but it is not spotted
(4) Spends two MP during third turn in the air searching for enemy and finds
    enemy TF on second MP.  Bombing of TF occurs.  If the strike had failed
    to locate a target on its second MP, it would have been forced to give up
    the search and fly north in order to return to its carrier before running
    out of fuel.
(5) With 0 time remaining in the air the strike must land on its base this
    turn.  The strike has 5 MP (4 without bombs +1 for the MP that was not
    used on the previous turn due to bombing of the enemy TF).  On the fifth
    movement point the strike enters a landing pattern. The strike will land
    on its carrier during the next turn if at that time all conditions for
    landing are met.


9.0  LANDING AIRCRAFT
     Aircraft that enter a TF landing pattern must land during the next turn
     or be forced to ditch. Aircraft in a TF landing pattern may land on any
     eligible carrier (or base) present in the subject TF.

9.1  Restrictions on Landings
     A carrier/base is eligible to recover aircraft only if the following
     conditions are met.

     (1) the flight operations USED during the turn are less than the
     OPERATION LIMIT.
     (2) the readied aircraft on deck do not exceed the carrier's MINIMUM
     OPERATION LIMIT.
     (3) the total number of aircraft on the carrier/base is less than the
     maximum capacity.

     Land bases do not have to conform to item (2) above.  Also, land bases
     may always land a number of planes equal to their MAXIMUM OPERATION LIMIT
     without regard to the number planes that have been launched during that
     turn (i.e. Midway with an OL of 75 could launch up to 75 planes during a
     turn and then land up to 75 planes during the same turn)

9.2  Emergency Landings
     After the landing phase has been completed all planes remaining in a
     landing pattern will attempt emergency landings if possible. These planes
     will land on any base or operational carrier in the same hex, as long as
     it has not exceeded its operation limit. The computer will conduct
     emergency landings automatically.


10.0 COMBAT RESOLUTION
     During the Combat Resolution Phase the computer will automatically
     perform the following functions:
          (1) air to air combat resolution
          (2) air to surface combat resolution
          (3) surface combat resolution
          (4) submarine combat resolution
          (5) coastal bombardment
          (6) unload transports

10.1  Air to Air Combat
     Air to air combat is initiated during the Air Movement Phase. Air to air
     combat consists of a fighter mission attacking a non-fighter mission. If
     the non-fighter mission has a fighter escort then the surviving escorts
     will counter attack the fighter mission.  Each fighter in the attacking
     group will select a target from the aircraft types in the defending
     group. If the defending air craft survives the attack then it will
     counterattack with DEFENSIVE FIRE.
     Each type of aircraft is rated for air-attack and survivability as shown
     below:
     AIRCRAFT     ATTACK   SURVIVE
     C. ZEKE        20        20
     L. ZEKE        17        17
     F4F            17        20
     F2A            10         5
     P39            12        10
     VAL            (2)        3
     KATE           (2)        3
     BETTY          (2)        3
     NELL           (2)        3
     JUDY           (2)        5
     SBD            (4)        9
     TBD            (1)        1
     TBF            (4)        8
     SB2U           (1)        1
     B26            (5)       10
     B25            (5)       10
     B17            (12)      25
     A24            (4)        9
     SEAPLANE       (0)        0
The ( ) indicate defensive fire only.

10.2  Air to Surface Combat
     Each bomber that survives air to air combat will select a target ship
     from those in the target TF and attempt to penetrate the TFs flak and
     deliver its ordnance. Target selection is accomplished in the following
     manner: each ship is assigned a selection value (SV) equal to its defense
     factor plus its aircraft and/or assault point capacity (add 1000 to the
     SV if the ship is a carrier). The chance of a particular ship being
     attacked is equal to the SV of that ship divided by the combined SV of
     the target TF. The chance of a bomber being shot down by flak is equal to
     the TF flak strength divided by 1200.  The TF flak strength is equal to
     the combined AA ratings (number of AA guns) of all the ships in the TF.
     AA fire directed at B17s will be only 10% as effective as against all
     other aircraft. The AA ratings of American ships will be adjusted for
     each scenario as follows:

     Coral Sea              x1.5
     Midway                 x2.0
     Eastern Solomons       x2.5
     Santa Cruz             x3.0

     Submarines may be sighted and bombed the same as surface ships.
     Submarines may "dive" be fore all of the bombers in a mission can
     complete their attacks.

10.3  Bomber Accuracy
     The chance of a bomber hitting the target is affected by: (1) bomber
     accuracy (2) maximum speed of target (3) flak intensity (4) size of
     target. The relative accuracy of each bomber is listed below:
     *VAL15    15        TBD-B     1
     *KATE-T   7         TBF-T     2
     *KATE-B   3         TBF-B     1
      BETTY-T  4         SB2U      1
      BETTY-B  2         A24       1
      NELL     1         B26       1
     *SBD      9         B25       1
      TBD-T    2         B17       1
      T = torpedo  B = high explosive bomb
     * In the Midway scenario the land based SBDs have an accuracy of 1. The
       land based VALs and KATEs are 50% as accurate as the carrier based versions.

10.4  Bombing Bases
     All bombers are equally accurate when attacking enemy bases. Base attacks
     may result in damage to the airfield and/or destroy aircraft on the
     ground (including seaplanes) and assault points. During base attacks,
     aircraft on the runway are easier to destroy than aircraft in the hangar.

10.5  Surface Combat
     Surface combat may occur between opposing TFs that occupy the same hex on
     the map.  Surface combat may require up to four rounds of action as
     listed below:

               Round 1: fire BB main guns
               Round 2: fire BB, CA main guns
               Round 3: fire all main guns Round
               Round 4: fire all main & AA guns, fire torpedoes

     In daylight, surface combat begins with round 1 and continues through
     round 4 OR until the TFs disengage.  At night surface combat begins with
     round 3. After each round of combat there is a 50% chance that the TFs
     will disengage. During each round of combat each eligible ship may select
     a target and fire its eligible weapons. Target selection is similar to
     bomber attacks (as a general rule the large guns will concentrate on
     large targets while AA guns and torpedoes will ignore target size). In
     surface combat the larger, slower ships will be easier to hit than the
     smaller,faster ships. Japanese torpedoes will be 10 times more accurate
     than American torpedoes There is a 36% chance that any task force will
     engage any enemy task force in the same hex.  Exception: enemy task
     forces in a base hex will always engage in surface combat.

10.6  Submarine Combat
     Submarine groups patrol an area equal to the hex they occupy plus the six
     adjacent hexes. Each turn, submarine groups have a chance to attack any
     enemy TF that is within its patrol area. The chance of attacking an enemy
     TF varies with (1) the number of submarines in the attacking group, (2)
     the number of ships in the target group.  Only one of the submarines in
     the group will actually conduct the attack. The attacking submarine will
     fire up to six torpedoes at a ship in the target TF. The accuracy of
     Japanese submarine torpedoes is 5 times greater than the accuracy of
     American submarine torpedoes.  As in surface combat the larger, slower
     targets will be easier to hit than the smaller, faster targets. After the
     submarine attacks, each escort (DD, DE, APD) in the target TF will
     attempt to locate and depth charge the submarine. Each escort has a 10%
     chance of locating and attacking the submarine. Each Japanese depth
     charge attack has a 1% chance of sinking the submarine. Each American
     depth charge attack has a 4% chance of sinking the submarine.

10.7  Coastal Bombardment
     In the Midway scenario Japanese ships may bombard Midway.  In the Eastern
     Solomons and Santa Cruz scenarios, if a Japanese TF occupies the
     Midway/Henderson Field hex then all ships in the TF with bombardment
     ammunition may bombard the airfield. Ships may perform only 1 bombardment
     per game.  The effects of bombardments are similar to the effects of air
     attacks on bases. Listed below is the relative bombardment effectiveness
     of Japanese ships.

     battleship     40
     heavy cruiser  15
     light cruiser   5
     destroyer       1

     The above ratings may vary with the different number of guns mounted on
     each class of ship. NOTE: the above ratings indicate that a battleship is
     as effective as 40 bombers, etc.

10.8 Unloading Transports
     Japanese transports and some other ship types (DD,MSW, ML, CS, AV, APD)
     may carry assault points.  Assault points are combinations of troops,
     equipment and supplies used in the invasion of an enemy base. In all of
     scenarios the Japanese Player may score victory points by unloading
     assault points on a particular base:

     SCENARIO                 BASE
     Coral Sea                Port Moresby
     Midway                   Midway
     Eastern Solomons         Henderson Field
     Santa Cruz               Henderson Field

     To unload at a base the transport TF must occupy the same hex as the
     base. Japanese transports may not unload on Midway when the base is at
     less than 50% damage.  Transports may unload only ONE assault point per
     turn.

10.9  Capturing Midway
     In the Midway scenario only, the Japanese player may capture an American
     base if the number of Japanese assault points unloaded on Midway is
     greater than the number of American assault points defending Midway then
     the Japanese will capture the island. If Midway is captured then all
     American aircraft and assault points on the island will be destroyed. The
     Japanese player may never USE the airfield during the game

10.10  Battle Reports
     As the computer resolves the combat situations the players will receive
     battle reports. Reports of aircraft destroyed or hits scored on ships
     will be exaggerated. Damage estimates will be displayed after each
     bombing attack to report the visible damage to an enemy base or ships in
     the target TF.  The damage estimate will display "*" for each ship with
     "light damage'; "**" for each ship with moderate damage; "***" for each
     ship with "heavy damage." Damage estimates will be frequently
     exaggerated. During surface combat, gun fire hits maybe followed by one
     or more "*"symbols. The number of symbols displayed indicates the calibre
     of the firing gun.


11.0  GENERAL OPERATIONS

11.1  Aircraft Endurance
     Each aircraft type is assigned an endurance rating that represents the
     number of hours it may remain in the air.

     C. ZEKE   4         P39       2
     L. ZEKE   9         SBD       3
     VAL       4         TBD       3
     KATE      4         TBF       4
     BETTY    12         SB2U      4
     NELL     10         A24       3
     JUDY      4         B26       5
     F4F       3         B25       6
     F2A       3         B17      10

     SEAPLANES.
     land based     18
     ship based      6

     Aircraft with "0 MIN" of fuel remaining must enter a landing pattern by
     the end of their current move (it requires 1 move point to enter a
     landing pattern) or they will automatically "ditch" at the start of their
     next move. Bombers with "0 MIN' of fuel will automatically jettison their
     ordnance. Fighter missions with "0 MIN" of fuel will be unable to
     initiate air to air combat. Example: A VAL group could fly 4 turns, enter
     a landing pattern on the 5th turn and land on the 6th turn.

11.2  Ship Damage
     Ships receive damage each time they are hit by bombs, torpedoes or
     gunfire. Ships with damage greater than 50% or with fires on board may
     receive additional self-inflicted damage. Listed be1ow are the AVERAGE
     damage points caused by each type of weapon.

         AA gun     1    American BB
    CL main gun     1       main gun    8
    CA main gun     2     21 torpedo    5
YAMATO main gun     9     24 torpedo    7
  NAGATO, MUTSU              AP-bomb    4
       main gun     7        HE-bomb    2
 other Japanese
      BB maingun     6

     Only Japanese surface ships may fire the 24 torpedo.
     AA guns will be only 50% as accurate as main guns.
     Each time a bomb, torpedo or gun hit is scored on a ship, the computer
     checks to see if an ARMOR PENETRATION has occurred.  The chance of a
     penetration is equal to three times the explosive rating of the weapon
     (see above) divided by the defense factor of the ship. Bomb or gun hits
     that penetrate will cause norma; damage plus possible fires, propulsion
     loss and/or destruction of the ships weapon systems. Bomb or gun hits
     that fail to penetrate will cause only 1 damage point. Torpedo hits that
     penetrate will cause DOUBLE damage, a loss of at least 5kts speed plus
     possible fires, and destruction of weapon systems. Torpedo hits that fail
     to penetrate will cause normal damage and a loss of at least 5kts speed.
     Carriers hit by bombs, torpedoes or gunfire may sustain additional damage
     if there are readied aircraft on the decks. The weapon hit wi1l randomly
     select an aircraft type and if that type of aircraft is on deck then 1/2
     of those aircraft will be destroyed and the fire level will be increased
     approximately by 1 for each aircraft destroyed. If the destroyed aircraft
     were armed with bombs or torpedoes then the fire level would increase
     approximately by 3 for each aircraft destroyed.

11.3  Damage Effects
     A ship that sustains damage points greater than or equal to its defense
     factor will sink.  Any ship with a fire level greater than zero may
     sustain additional damage each turn until the fire is put out. On the
     average a ships fire level will be reduced by one point each turn unless
     the fire is out of control.  If the fire level is greater than the ships
     defense factor, it is out of control and will gain an average of 3 fire
     levels per turn. Ships that have suffered more than 50% damage may
     sustain additional damage each turn. Ships with over 50% damage will
     frequently suffer loss of propulsion. Damage to carriers may prevent them
     from conducting flight operations. Flight operations will be suspended if
     any of the following conditions exist: (1) fire level is greater than 4,
     (2) damage is greater than 25%, (3) maximum speed is less than 5kts.
     Fires will prevent ships from operating at maximum speed. The adjusted
     maximum speed of a burning ship is equal to the maximum speed minus the
     fire level.

11.4  Base Damage
     Bases may suffer damage if subjected to bombing or coastal bombardment.
     Bases suffer 1-2% damage each time they are hit. At the end of each turn
     bases will repair 10%~ of their damage.  Bases with over 25% damage will
     be unable to operate aircraft. In the Midway scenario, Japanese
     transports may not unload on Midway unless there is 50% or more damage on
     the base.
     EXAMPLE A base with 40% damage will repair to 36% damage after one turn.

11.5  Weather
     The two elements of weather that affect game operations are WIND
     DIRECTION and CLOUD COVER.  Wind direction affects the ability of
     carriers to launch and recover aircraft, while cloud cover affects the
     ability of air missions to to locate enemy TFs/bases. The weather
     conditions are subject to change at the start of each turn. There is a
     20% chance that the wind direction will change (the new direction is
     determined randomly). Cloud cover may vary by plus or minus 25% each
     turn. The ability of aircraft to locate enemy TFs and bases is reduced by
     the cloud cover percentage. Also the number of ships spotted in the
     SIGHTING REPORT will be reduced by the cloud cover percentage.

11.6  Non-Combat Aircraft Losses
     Air missions are subject to non-combat losses each time they enter a
     landing pattern. In daylight with 0% overcast air missions will average
     0.5% (each aircraft has 1 chance in 200) losses per landing.  Losses are
     increased by 1% for every 10% of cloud cover and by 10% if it is a NIGHT
     turn.
     EXAMPLE On a night turn with 40% overcast the loss rate will be 14.5%.

11.7 Scenario Duration
     The computer is programmed to end each scenario on a particular date:
     CORAL SEA             8 MAY 42
     MIDWAY               7 JUN 42
     EASTERN SOLOMONS    25 AUG 42
     SANTA CRUZ          27 OCT 42
     For each scenario the game will automatically end at the completion of
     the 2100-hour turn.

11.8  Aircraft Classification
     Aircraft used in the game are classified as follows:
     FIGHTERS: ZEKE,F4F, F2A, P39
     TORPEDO BOMBERS: KATE,TBD,TBF
     TORPEDO BOMBERS: KATE,TBD,TBF
     LEVEL BOMBERS: BETTY, NELL, B17, B25, B26
     RECONNAISSANCE: JUDY
     Although the BETTY and B26 may sometimes carry torpedoes they are still
     CLASSIFIED as level bombers.

11.9  Aircraft Base Restrictions
     Aircraft with a name prefix of "C." are carrier based aircraft. Aircraft
     with a name prefix of "L." are land based.  Carrier based aircraft may
     operate from either carrier or land bases.  Land based aircraft may never
     land on a carrier.  Aircraft classified as level bombers may not be
     READIED at a base with an operation limit less than 60.

11.10  Radar
     During all scenarios, the American player will receive radar reports of
     Japanese air missions in the same hex with friendly TFs. Radar reports
     will be rough estimates (usually exaggerated) of the number of aircraft
     in the enemy air mission.  Radar may occasionally fail to detect some
     enemy missions (the chance of failure varies with the size of the
     mission).

11.11  Pilot Ability
     The differing abilities of the pilots in the four scenarios is accounted
     for by altering bomber accuracy and air-attack survivability ratings as
     follows:

     SCENARIO       US PILOTS      JAPANESE PILOTS
     Coral Sea           -1             -1
     Midway              +1              0
     Eastern Solomons    +1              0
     Santa Cruz          +1              0


12.0  SCORING
     At the end of the game, the players score points for sinking and damaging
     enemy ships/bases and points for each surviving combat aircraft. The
     Japanese player scores points for successfully unloading "assault points"
     at an enemy base.

12.1  Sunk Ships
     Points awarded for sinking enemy ships equals TWO X DEFENSE FACTOR. If
     enemy carriers have been sunk, additional points are awarded equaling the
     aircraft capacity of the carrier. If Midway is captured the Japanese
     player receives points as if he had "sunk" a carrier with a defense
     factor of 80  and a capacity of 150 (310 points).

12.2  Damaged Ships/Bases
     Points received for damaging enemy ships/bases equals 1 per damage point
     plus 1 per fire level (Your opponent may score more points if you let
     your ship burn than if you SCUTTLE it)...

12.3  Surviving Aircraft
     One point is scored for each friendly combat aircraft ON A CARRIER OR
     BASE at the end of the game.

12.4  Japanese Assault Points
     One point is received for each Japanese assault point unloaded at an
     enemy base.

12.5  Handicap Points
     The Japanese player will receive 100 points in the Eastern Solomons
     scenario. The U.S player will receive 100 points in the Santa Cruz
     scenario.


13.0  VICTORY CONDITIONS
     At the end of the game victory points will be calculated and the level of
     victory will be determined by comparing the scores of the two players.

13.1  Victory Levels
     Subtract the Japanese Victory Points from the American Victory Points and
     compare the results to the following table to determine the victory
     level:

      600 and up    American 0Decisive Victory
      300 to 599    American Substantive Victory
      100 to 299    American Marginal Victory
      -99 to 99     Draw
     -299 to -100   Japanese Marginal Victory
     -599 to -600   Japanese Substantive Victory
     -600 or less   Japanese Decisive Victory


14.0  SOLITAIRE PLAY
     When playing solitaire games the computer will command the Japanese
     forces. There are 4 levels of solitaire difficulty.  The level of
     difficulty is determined when starting a new game and may be altered when
     restarting a saved game. As the level number is decreased the Japanese
     forces will perform searches more efficiently. These levels may be used
     to handicap a two Player game if desired.  Level 3 is considered the
     "historical" level.

     It is possible to start a game in solitaire mode, save it, and then
     restart it as a two-player game. To do this, set the main menu to
     two-player mode before reloading the saved game data. It is possible to
     save a two player game and restart it as a solitaire game. This should
     only be done experimentally as the computer may be confused by many human
     devised deployments.


15.0  STRATEGY NOTES
15.1  Task Force Movement
     Each turn the players will have the chance to change a TFs direction. The
     TF will move automatically when it accumulates 50 or more movement
     points. Carrier TFs that are conducting air operations will move very
     slowly unless they are facing the same direction that the wind is blowing
     from. The loss of movement points is caused by the carriers alternating
     between their assigned course and the "WIND FROM" direction to launch/
     recover aircraft.

15.2  Searches
     Searches should be performed by seaplanes whenever possible. Searches are
     necessary to pinpoint the location of enemy TFs so that they may be
     attacked. When the general location of the enemy carriers is unknown,
     then it is important to concentrate the search planes in the areas
     surrounding friendly carriers.  The total number of search missions
     should seldom exceed 7 or 8.

15.3  Fighter Patrols
     Fighter patrols may be used to attack enemy seaplanes and bomber groups
     that enter their patrol area.  During daylight turns, Carrier TFs should
     maintain at least one fighter mission airborne at all times to shoot down
     enemy seaplanes.  On turns when enemy bomber attacks are expected, the
     carrier TFs should maintain at least half of their fighter strength in
     protective fighter patrols. In scenarios where the U.S. player has radar,
     the carriers can launch 40 to 60 fighters on the turn the incoming
     bombers are detected.

15.4  Bomber Missions
     When launching bomber missions, the crucial factors are (1) the number of
     fighter escorts included and (2) the total number of aircraft formed into
     each mission. As a rule of thumb a bomber mission should include at least
     1 fighter for every 3 bombers to prevent the bombers from being
     slaughtered by enemy fighter patrols. Bomber missions attacking targets
     at normal range should form large groups of bombers and escorts. Bomber
     groups attacking targets at extended range should form several smaller
     groups of less than 15 aircraft each. Extended range for Japanese bombers
     is 6 or 7 hexes. Extended range for U.S. bombers is 4 or 5 hexes.

15.5  Carrier Operations
     Carrier operations consist of launching and recovering aircraft. Carriers
     are limited in the number of operations they may perform each turn due to
     their limited space. Carriers that spend too many of their operations
     launching aircraft maybe unable to recover aircraft on the same turn.
     Likewise carriers with overcrowded decks (aircraft on deck exceed minimum
     operation limit) will also be unable to recover aircraft on the same
     turn.  On turns when a large number of aircraft are in landing patterns,
     the receiving carriers should turn into the wind and clear the decks of
     excess aircraft. The total aircraft launched should be regulated to
     insure sufficient remaining operations to land all of the aircraft.

15.6  Coral Sea
     The JAPANESE PLAYER should move the transport TFs to Port Moresby and
     unload the troops. The Japanese carrier TFs should hang near the
     transport TFs and bomb any U.S. TF that moves into range. Land-based
     aircraft should concentrate on bombing Port Moresby to reduce the U.S.air
     presence near the invasion site.

     The US. PLAYER can get some early target practice using Yorktown's
     airgroups to bomb the small Japanese TF at Tulagi.  The two U.S. carrier
     groups should rendezvous by the end of the first day and move west during
     the night hours. The U.S. cruiser TF should move Northwest and attempt to
     engage the Japanese Transport TFs in daylight surface combat. Weather
     Permitting, a major carrier engagement should occur on the second or
     third day of the game.

15.7  Midway
     All JAPANESE TFs should proceed directly to Midway. There they can unload
     transports and bombard the U.S. base.  When playing the historical
     set-up, the Japanese carriers should ready their bombers for a major
     strike against the U.S. carrier TFs.  When playing the random set-up the
     Japanese player should launch a dawn strike to bomb Midway (range
     permitting). Japanese battleship TFs should make an effort to bombard
     Midway and then attempt to engage the U.S. TFs in surface combat.

     The U.S. PLAYER should reserve all available resources to attack the big
     Japanese carriers.  Air strikes against the transports should be
     attempted only after the big carriers have all been sunk or disabled. The
     U.S. player should be careful to avoid a surface engagement with the
     Japanese battleship TFs.

15.8  Eastern Solomons
     The JAPANESE PLAYER should send his carrier TFs Southeast as fast as
     possible to force an engagement with the U.S. carriers before the WASP
     group can join them. The transport TF should move to Henderson Field and
     unload.The transport TF should abort its mission and retreat North if the
     Japanese carriers are knocked out. Japanese land based bombers should fly
     one mission per day to bomb Henderson Field. The Japanese battleship TF
     may bombard Henderson Field or attempt to engage the U.S. carrier TFs in
     a surface combat.

     The U.S. PLAYER should transfer all F4Fs, SBDs and TBFs from Espiritu
     Santo to Henderson Field at the start of the game.  Aircraft based on
     Henderson should be used to bomb the Japanese transport TFs; U.S. carrier
     aircraft should be reserved to attack the Japanese carrier TFs. If the US
     player delays combat to wait for the WASP group to catch up, then the
     Japanese will have a free hand to pound Henderson Field on the first day.

15.9  Santa Cruz
     The JAPANESE PLAYER should send his carrier TFs directly south to force
     an engagement with the U.S.carriers. The Junyo force should move in the
     same hex as the other Japanese carrier TF to provide mutual fighter
     support. The Japanese battleship TFs may bombard Henderson Field or
     attempt to engage the U.S. TFs in surface combat. Japanese land based
     aircraft should bomb Henderson Field once per day.  The Japanese
     destroyer TF that starts near Buin may be used to unload troops on
     Henderson.

     The U.S. PLAYER should steer his carrier TFs as close as possible to
     Henderson Field before engaging the Japanese Carriers.  The U.S. carriers
     should withdraw South at night to avoid the possibility of Surface Combat
     with the Japanese battleship TFs.


               AIRCRAFT CHARACTERISTICS

Aircraft  Max    Aircraft   Bomber    Air to Air Combat
Type     Speed  Endurance  Accuracy   Attack   Survive
-------------------------------------------------------
C. Zeke   4         4         -         20        20
L. Zeke   4         9         -         17        17
VAL       4         4         15*       (2)       3
KATE      4         4         7/3*      (2)       3
BETTY     4         12        4/2       (2)       3
NELL      3         10        -         (2)       3
JUDY      4         4         -         (2)       5
F4F       4         3         -         17        20
F2A       4         3         -         10        5
P39       5         2         -         12        10
SBD       4         3         9*        (4)       9
SB2U      3         4         1         (1)       1
TBD       3         3         2/1       (1)       1
TBF       4         4         2/1       (4)       8
B26       4         5         1         (5)       10
B25       4         6         1         (5)       10
B17       4         10        1         (12)      25
A24       4         3         1         (4)       9
SEAPLANE  3         6,18      -         (0)       0
---------------------------------------------------------------------- ---
( ) = Defensive fire only          *In the Midway scenario the land based
 / = torpedo/high explosive bombs  SBDs have an accuracy of 1.

                             The land  based VALs and KATEs are
 , = ship-based, land based        50% as accurate as the carrier based
                                   versions.
---------------------------------------------------------------------- ---
          MINIMUM OPERATION LIMITS
     Akagi     12             Lexington 12
     Kaga 12             Saratoga       12
     Hiryu     12        Yorktown       12
     Soryu     12        Enterprise     12
     Shokaku   12        Hornet         12
     Zuikaku   12        Wasp           11
     Junyo      9
     Shoho      6        Ryujo           6
     Zuiho      6        Hosho           3
--------------------------------------------

               PILOT ABILITY

Scenario       U.S. Pilots    Japanese Pilots
Coral Sea           -1             -1
Midway               0             +1
Eastern Solomons    +1              0
Santa Cruz          +1              0

