NORTHERN FLEET, Modern Naval Operations In The Atlantic Ocean.


Index:
1.0	Introduction
2.0	General Course Of Play
3.0	Game Equipment
4.0	Getting Started
5.0	The Command Segment
6.0	The Reports Segment
7.0	The Search Segment
8.0	The Combat Resolution Segment
9.0	Ending Or Saving The Game
10.0     Victory
11.0      Designer's Notes On Play

Credits:
Design:  W.J. Nichols
Development:  J. Baker and S. Newberg
Playtesting:  J. Butters, P. Hollinger, T. Konczal, D. Markov, D. Winston, and
              the W.I.T. Group
Cover Art:  J. Kula, (C) 1988
Printing: Halcraft Print.


The enclosed software program on diskette, rules booklet, and map sheets are copyrighted. These items may not be copied, translated or reduced to any electronic or machine readable form, in whole or in part, without prior written consent from Simulations Canada.  The software program may be copied, by the original purchaser only, to provide a secure backup copy of the provided program diskette. However, such a copy may not be 6iven away or sold to other individuals or firms of any form. We do not protect our software so that purchasers will have no difficulty making a backup copy.  Please do not abuse this policy.

Copyright (C), 1988 by Simulations Canada, P.O. Box 452, Bridgewater, Nova Scotia, Canada, B4V 2X6.  MADE IN CANADA.


BACKGROUND:  In the fall of 1995 the Soviet leadership determined that a
significant shift in the "correlation of forces" had taken place.  Throughout
the world the forces of socialism were slowly gaining an advantage over the
West.  The Soviet leaders believed that an opportunity existed for the USSR to
assert its power and achieve a major strategic breakthrough.  As a result of
NATO's conventional military weakness and Soviet strategic nuclear
superiority, the world had been made safe for increased Soviet activism, even
at the risk of conventional war between the superpowers.  The Soviets now
turned their attention to what the British press once called "the Achilles
Heel of NATO".

In early March 1996, the Soviets made it clear to the Norwegian Government
that they sought a permanent solution to the 'Grey Zone' dispute, revocation
of the Svalbard Treaty, joint Soviet-Norwegian rule of Svalbard, and
sovereignty over Bear Island.  The Norwegians stalled, and with tension in the
region mounting, the Soviets began their annual naval exercise in the
Norwegian, Barents, and Baltic Seas Units from the Twice Honored Red Banner
Northern Fleet and Red Banner Baltic Fleet sortied from their bases. The
Soviets also mobilized the ground and air forces of the Leningrad Military
District in an obvious attempt to pressure the Norwegians. After two weeks of
intensive operations, which included an amphibious assault exercise against
the Kola Peninsula coast, the Soviet ships returned to port for a period of
reorganization and repair.  On 25 March, a naval group put to sea for what
appeared to be a second round of operations, but its true intentions soon
became all too apparent.  At dawn on 27 March 1996, a regiment of the Soviet
63rd 'Kirkenes' Naval Infantry Brigade with the support of an air assault
battalion captured the entire Svalbard Archipelago. Norway and NATO were
presented with a most unpleasant fait accompli.  By mid-afternoon on the 27th,
the military forces of NATO had been placed on alert and the Norwegians began
mobilizing their reserves.  An American aircraft carrier battleforce, composed
of the USS Kennedy and USS Roosevelt, was ordered into the North Atlantic.
The Battle For The Norwegian Sea was about to begin. [From "Defending Norway
And The Northern Flank", by M. K. Mahon].


1.0     INTRODUCTION: NORTHERN FLEET is a detailed game type simulation of
modem naval operations in the North Atlantic for one or two players.  Each
player may control up to ten task forces (composed of individual surface
ships), individual submarines, and air groups.  They will be responsible for
the operational control of each unit under their command.  The viewpoint of
the players is thus that of the Theater naval commander of each side: SACLANT
for NATO, and the Northern Fleet Commander for the USSR.  As such, the players
may compose task forces, establish missions and destinations for those forces,
order major strikes, review intelligence reports, and suggest to their
national command a conflict level they feel appropriate.  Other operations
that the theater commander would not deal with directly, such as individual
ship movement, target selection, weapon employment, and aircraft operations,
will be handled automatically by the computer.


        2.0 GENERAL COURSE OF PLAY:     The game is composed of two major
sections, the start up of the game and the game itself. The start up allows
the players to select their own passwords so that only they can play their
portion of the game.  Start up also lets the players resume a previous game
that had been saved. The game is played in turns and follows a constant
sequence of play composed of four segments for each turn.  In the first
segment the players may give orders for the actions of their forces for the
turn.  The Soviet player goes first, recommending a conflict level, adjusting
task forces, giving movement orders, etc.  ' Next the NATO player conducts the
same operations, thus ending the segment.  In the second segment both players
will receive any reports available from their forces.  The NATO player
receives these reports first, and then the Soviet player.  These may include
reports of contact and/or combat with enemy forces.  The third segment then
begins with search a us reports, first for the Soviet player, followed by
similar reports for the NATO player.  Under certain circumstances either or
both players may be given the option to launch missile and/or airstrikes at
the close of their portion of this segment. The final segment of the turn
resolves combat and other events, displaying the results. The players will
then be asked if they wish to continue the game.  If they do, play proceeds to
the next turn.  Otherwise, the computer will give them the chance to save the
game at this point, indicate the current victory point status of the players,
and allow the players to review the status of their forces at the end of the
game.


3.0   GAME EQUIPMENT: Two identical, laminated maps are included in the game.
The two colored markers provided with the game can be used to record the
locations of friendly task forces  and submarines  as well as possible
locations for opposing units.  Notations from these markers can be erased
completely by rubbing the map with a damp cloth.  The map is overlaid with a
grid of squares. Each square is termed a sector. Each sector is identified by
an alphanumeric designation formed by cross referencing the vertical letter
designation for the rows with the number designator for the vertical columns.
All references to locations on the map must be made in this format.  Thus, the
air base at Bodo, Norway is in sector 017 and the Faroe Islands are in sector
Q10.  The time/distance scale is 8 hours per turn with sectors approximately
70 nautical miles square.  Sectors represent either land, open ocean, or
ice-covered ocean.  Only nuclear submarines (SSN/SSGN/SSBN) may enter
ice-covered ocea n sectors.  No naval units may enter land sectors.  In
addition, the map shows NATO and Soviet airbases, naval bases, and the
location of the Soviet SSBN bastion areas.  These features have no effect on
movement.


4.0	GETTING STARTED:

4.1     BOOTING: Before first booting the game you should format a blank disk
for saving games onto.  Consult your system documentation for how to format a
disk.  Apple users must format under ProDOS.  To boot the game, place the game
disk in the primary drive and turn on the computer.  Commodore users must type
'LOAD "NF",8' followed by 'RUN'.  IBM-PC users should use DOS 2.0 or later and
boot the game by inserting the disk in the default drive of an already running
system and typing 'NF''.  Note that the files can be loaded onto a hard disk
and the game started from that directory.  Amiga, Atari ST, and MacIntosh
users should start the file NF.PRG. After starting the game, keep the game
disk in the disk drive unless told to do otherwise by the program.

4.2     NEW OR SAVED GAME: The program will ask if you wish to start a new
game or restart a saved game.  If you are restarting a saved game, insert the
disk with the saved game into. the primary drive and follow the prompts given
on the screen.

4.3   ONE  OR TWO PLAYERS & PASSWORDS:  When starting a game the computer will
need to know how many people will play.  By selecting 'O' for One, your
opponent will be the computer. If playing against the computer you will be
given a choice of which side you wish the computer to play.  If playing
against another player, the players will be asked to select a password.
Simply select a few letters and type them in.  This password will be requested
by the computer at the start of each player's portion of a segment so that
only the correct player can play.  When playing against the computer passwords
are not used.

4.4   STARTING POSITIONS:             The computer will set up the game.  If
players are restarting a saved game the starting positions will be as when the
saved game was previously stopped. For a new game the computer will deploy the
initial forces.  NATO will always be deployed as two aircraft carrier task
forces, plus submarines.  The Soviets start with only submarines at sea.
Start locations and arrival times of reinforcements will vary with each game.

4.5       UNIT AND TASK FORCE DESIGNATIONS:     Each player's units are
assigned an individual unit number and vessel class name, as well as a unit
type abbreviation.  Thus, '4 CG SLAVA-2' represents unit number 4, which is
the second Slava class guided missile cruiser.  All communications to the
computer dealing with a particular ship or submarine must reference that unit
by its unit number (4 in the above example).  Each player's task forces will
be assigned a number from one to ten by the computer, starting with one.  A
player may have a maximum of ten task forces in play at any one time.

4.6     ENTERING INFORMATION: During play the computer detects the completion
of each information entry by the player pressing the <RETURN> or <ENTER> key.
'Y' and 'N' are responses for Yes and No questions while digits are used for
number responses.  If just a return or enter is given the computer will assume
that no change from the previous state is required.  Note that all entries
should be made in upper case.  During the display of contact reports and
combat results, the scrolling of the screen can be paused by simply pressing a
key.  To resume play, again press a key.

4.7 ABBREVIATIONS:  Unit types are abbreviated as follows: AOE and AOR
(replenishment ships);           BCN (nuclear battle cruiser);     CG '(guided
missile cruiser);   CGN (nuclear guided missile cruiser);    CV (aircraft
carrier);    CVN (nuclear aircraft carrier);            CVH (helicopter
carrier);          CVHG (guided missile helicopter carrier);          DD
(destroyer);           DDG (guided missile destroyer); FF (frigate);  FFG
(guided missile frigate); LPD and LST (amphibious landing ships);    SS
(diesel attack submarine);       SSN (nuclear attack submarine); SSGN (nuclear
guided missile submarine);                SSBN (nuclear ballistic missile
submarine).

Abbreviations for weapon types are: LAM (land attack cruise missile); SSM
(surface to surface antiship missile); ASW (antisubmarine weapon); SAM
(surface to air missile); ASM (air to surface antiship missile); TOR
(torpedo).  Other abbreviations are: co (commanding officer); EW (electronic
warfare); SOA (speed of advance); KTS (knots - nautical miles per hour); SLOC
(sea lanes of communication); CAP (combat air patrol).



5.0     THE COMMAND SEGMENT:

5.1     GENERAL: During the Command Segment the players may give orders to
their forces.  The Soviet player phase will always be the first in the
segment.  The player's Command Segment begins by displaying the day, time,
weather, weather forecast, currently earned victory points, status of Norway,
and the previous turn's conflict level.  The players may suggest one of four
levels of conflict: 1) 'Rising Tensions', 2) 'Conventional Warfare', 3)
'Tactical Nuclear Warfare', or 4) 'Operational Nuclear Warfare'.  The computer
will indicate if the recommendation is accepted or denied by the player's
national leadership.  Play will then move to a list of options called the Task
Force Operations menu.  By typing in the number of the desired selection, play
will proceed to that selection.  Each of these selections is detailed below. 

5.2     STANDARD SELECTIONS:

5.21    FORM A TASK FORCE: This allows the creation of a new task force from
available surface ships that have not yet been assigned to a task force.  Each
available surface ship will be displayed one at a time.  By pressing the
letter 'A' the ship will be added to the new task force.  The player may have
no more than ten task forces in play simultaneously.  New Soviet task forces
will appear in sector M22.  New British forces will appear in sector U11.  New
US task forces will appear along the south or west map edges.  Note that
surface ships that have not been formed into a task force are not considered
to have as yet entered the map area for movement, search, or combat purposes.

5.22    COMBINE TWO TASK FORCES: This selection allows the player to merge two
task forces into a single task force, provided the task forces involved are in
the same sector and belong to the same player.

5.23  SPLIT A TASK FORCE: This selection allows the player to form a new task
force by dividing an existing task force into two parts.  The procedure starts
by asking which task force is to be split and then forms the new task force by
the same system as in the normal forming of a new task force (rule 5.21).

5.24    REVIEW A TASK FORCE'S MAKEUP:   This selection displays the location,
mission, initiative rating, reliability rating, and EMCON level (a measure of
electronic 'quietness') of a task force.  The ships composing the task force
will be listed, along with any damage a particular ship has taken (given as a
percentage number) and the maximum SOA (in knots).  The initiative and
reliability of a task force will be that of the Commanding Officer of the ship
leading the task force.  The computer will assign which ship this will be,
generally on the basis of which is the most valuable vessel and hence would be
carrying the most senior naval officer.  Reliability is a rating of how well a
particular CO will carry out his orders while initiative indicates how well
the CO will deal with situations and opportunities for which he has no orders.
The SOA represents the fastest rate of advance that a task force can maintain
over an 8 hour period.  The SOA of a task force will automatically be tha the
slowest vessel in the task force.  During stormy weather, task forces will not
travel faster than 24 knots.

5.25 CHECK A UNIT'S STATUS:  This selection lets the player examine a specific
ship or submarine. The display indicates the vessel, the initiative &
reliability ratings of its CO, the weapons carried, and a series of numeric
ratings of the unit's capabilities in various areas.  Higher ratings indicate
greater capability.

5.26    CHANGE A TASK FORCE'S MISSION:  This selection allows the player to
change the mission of a task force.  A task force will attempt to carry out
its assigned mission to the extent of its reliability while it may attempt to
conduct operations other than that assigned to the extent of its initiative.
Possible missions are: 'General Purpose', which will have the force move to
the assigned destination but only enter combat at the task force CO's
initiative; 'Anti-Surface' which will have the force concentrate on combat
against opposing surface targets; 'Anti-Submarine', which will' have the force
concentrate on combat against submarines; 'Attack Shore Targets', which will
allow the force to conduct strikes against enemy bases; and, 'Shadow Enemy
Task Force', which will cause the force to follow an enemy task force so as to
be able to report its position and possibly conduct attacks.  Task forces with
an Anti-Submarine mission will never travel faster than 24 knots.  Task forces
givn Attack Shore Targets mission must have a specific enemy target assigned.
Vessels with gunfire capability will provide shore bombardment, vessels with
land attack cruise missiles may launch them if within range, and assigned
aircraft carriers will be able to launch air strikes against the specified
target.  Resulting damage to air bases may temporarily put the air base out of
operation, while damage to port facilities may cause the scheduled
availability of units there to be delayed.  Note that to have a Shadow Enemy
Task Force mission, the task force need not be in the same sector as an
opposing task force; it will begin to shadow when it finds something.

5.27    LIST UNIT LOCATIONS & DESTROYED SHIPS: This selection will list the
locations of all friendly task forces as well as the locations of friendly
submarines that are in radio contact.  After this listing, a separate list of
friendly units that are known to have been destroyed and their victory point
values will be displayed.

5.28    REVIEW UNIT ARRIVALS: This selection will list all the friendly ships
and submarines that have been committed to the player, but which have not yet
arrived or been formed into task forces.  Next to each unit will be a number
indicating how many turns remain before the unit will become available. Also
indicated is the sector in which the unit will arrive.

5.29    GIVE MOVEMENT ORDERS: Going to this selection will permanently exit
the player from the Task Force Operations Menu.  After selecting it the player
will be given a last chance to return to that menu.  By selecting 'M' the
movement segment will be initiated. In movement the player may issue movement
orders to each of his task forces and to any submarines that are in radio
contact.  Each submarine that can accept orders will be listed sequentially.
Destinations must be ordered for the task force or submarine currently being
presented before proceeding to the next.  These orders take the form of
entering the designation of a location toward which the player wishes the task
force or submarine to proceed.  The unit or task force will move toward that
destination each turn until it either arrives (and then remains in the sector
in a patrol pattern) or its destination is changed by further orders.  Units
that are currently shadowing an enemy task force do not require destination
order  When a submarine is in radio contact to receive orders, the player will
also be given a chance to change the mission of the submarine.  Submarine
missions are the same as those for task forces with the following additions:
1) Submarines may provide Escort for a friendly task force.  To be ordered to
do this, they must be in the same sector as the task force when the order is
given.  They will then automatically go where the task force goes and perform
both anti-surface and anti-submarine missions. 2) Soviet submarines may be
assigned to the Anti-SLOC mission.  Subs with an Anti-SLOC mission will
automatically select a destination on the west or south map edge (between
coordinates N-U and 1-7) and, once reaching that destination, exit the map to
attack the Atlantic shipping lanes.  Finally, the player may order a submarine
to proceed to its destination at a certain SOA.  Note that submarines
travelling at high speeds will have their sonar effectiveness reduced and will
be easier to detect by enemy forces.

5.3     SPECIAL SELECTIONS:

5.31    ASSIGN SPETSNAZ TARGET: On the turn that the war begins, and before
entering the Task Force Operations Menu, the Soviet player will be required to
assign a target to his SPETSNAZ (special forces).  The target may be any one
of the NATO airfields, the SOSUS facility in Iceland, or the OTH (Over The
Horizon) Radar site in the UK.  The results of the SPETSNAZ attack will be
resolved at the end of the turn.  Successful attacks against airfields will
destroy one or more aircraft on the ground.  A successful attack against SOSUS
will severely degrade the NATO player's ability to track Soviet submarines in
the Norwegian Sea.  As a consequence, the P-3s based in Keflavik will be
essentially worthless for ASW.  A successful attack against the OTH Radar site
will mean that NATO will not have advance warning of Soviet airstrikes flying
out of the Kola bases. Thus maximum defending CAP fighters will seldom be
airborne when Soviet strikes arrive.
	
5.32 LAY MINEFIELDS:           After the war begins each player will have an
opportunity to attempt to mine one sector each turn.  Minefields are only
effective against enemy submarines and are considered to be dropped by off-map
aircraft (for example, U.S. mainland based B-52s for the NATO player).
Consequently, mines can only be laid in open ocean areas (i.e., sectors
without ice), enemy fighters can cause mining missions to be aborted, and
mines cannot be laid during stormy weather.  NATO submarines entering Soviet
minefields have a 5 percent chance of being sunk.  Soviet submarines entering
NATO minefields have a 2.5 percent chance of being sunk.  A sector can be
mined more than once and its effectiveness increases as more minefields are
laid in it.  Furthermore, note that the approaches to the Soviet bases in M22,
and the entrance to the White Sea, are considered to be extensively mined at
the start of the game.  NATO subs ordered to enter these areas do so at
considerable risk.

5.33 COMMIT 76TH AIRBORNE DIVISION:     One time during the game the Soviet
player may attempt to destroy a NATO airbase by conducting an airborne assault
against it.  Permissible targets are Bodo, Trondheim, the Faroes, and
Keflavik.  A successful attack will destroy the airfield but will not permit
Soviet aircraft to use the base.  A successful assault at Keflavik will also
destroy NATO's SOSUS system.


6.0     THE REPORTS SEGMENT: When both players have completed the Command
segment, play will move to the Reports Segment.  This segment consists of
separate report phases for each player (starting with the NATO player)
followed by a joint player segment to display combat results occurring during
movement.  Each player's radio reports will announce the results of any
encounters with opposing units while in the same sector, dependent on their
mission, reliability, and initiative.  Out of contact submarines may conduct
attacks but not report that they have done so.  Attacks will not be conducted
by forces of a player whose conflict level is Rising Tensions (Level 1) except
that units with low reliability and high initiative might launch an attack,
thus unintentionally starting the war.  The longer the game remains at
conflict level 1, the more likely this is to occur.  Units and task forces may
counterattack opposing units that have attacked them regardless of the
conflict level.


7.0	THE SEARCH SEGMENT:

7.1     GENERAL: During the Search segment each player will be presented with
a reports menu that will give the results of intelligence collection, searches
by task forces and submarines, and aircraft reconnaissance flights.  In
addition, the player will be able to examine the status of all the aircraft
currently at his disposal.  Finally, the player may, if it is feasible, be
given the chance to order the launch of coordinated missile and/or aircraft
strikes against a particular target or location.

7.2     NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE & ELECTRONIC INTERCEPTS: This selection will
display the approximate locations of opposing task forces detected by ocean
surveillance satellites, HF radio intercepts, and other national intelligence
means.  Opposing units that have communicated extensively with headquarters
during the proceeding Command segment (i.e., have a low EMCON rating because
the player made numerous references to the unit or task force while giving
orders) will be more likely to be detected.  In addition, either player may be
given information on enemy submarine movements.  SOSUS, if operational, may
detect Soviet submarines in the Norwegian Sea while NATO submarines in the
Barents Sea may be detected by Soviet underwater listening arrays.

7.3     ENEMY ORDER OF BATTLE & AIRBASE STATUS REPORTS: This selection will
display a top level estimate of how many enemy units of each type are at sea
or in port.  This selection also gives an estimate of the status of each enemy
airbase, including how many aircraft are estimated to be based there.

7.4     TASK FORCE & SUBMARINE CONTACT REPORTS: Units that are in the same
sector as an enemy task force may report the location and estimated
composition of the opposing forces.

7.5 AIR SEARCH REPORTS: The player will be given the results of searches
conducted automatically by land and aircraft carrier based patrol aircraft
(BEARS, P-3s, SV22s, and helicopters).  The location and estimated composition
of opposing forces may be reported.  No air searches will occur during stormy
weather.

7.6     AIRCRAFT STATUS: This selection will show the status of aircraft
assigned to each air base and aircraft carrier under the player's command.  An
availability list will be shown for each aircraft type.  Aircraft indicated as
'Ready' will automatically go on any strike assigned.  The rest of the
pipeline is indicated in 8-hour increments, each of which represents one turn.
Thus, aircraft shown at 24 hours will be 'Ready' in three turns. Aircraft on
CAP, if any, will be assigned automatically and their quantity indicated.
NATO fighters that are 'Ready' may be scrambled to augment the CAP if the OTH
Radar site in the UK detects the launch of Soviet airstrikes from the Kola
Peninsula.  During stormy weather all aircraft will be grounded. In addition,
this selection for the NATO player (only) will indicate if the selected
airbase has sufficient HARPOON missiles for its aircraft. Airstrikes against
Soviet task forces will employ  Harpoons as long as they are available.
Subsequent sts will be armed solely with bombs.  Each U.S. replenishment ship
has a 50 percent chance of being able to replace an aircraft carrier's supply
of HARPOONS.  The replenishment ship must be in the same task force as the
aircraft carrier to do this.  Once a replenishment ship has rearmed an
aircraft carrier, it is considered to have no more missiles on board.

7.7     MISSILE & AIRCRAFT STRIKE ASSIGNMENT:   After indicating completion of
his review of the search results, the player may be given the opportunity to
conduct strikes against opposing task forces or land targets.  To reflect
doctrinal differences, the Soviet and NATO players have slightly different
options.  The Soviet player may conduct a single coordinated missile and
aircraft strike each turn.  To indicate where the strike will be targeted, the
Soviet player must enter the sector location of the strike.  All units and
aircraft within range will be ordered to launch at that target location.
Depending on unit mission, initiative, reliability, weather, and
communications status, they may or may not comply.  For the NATO player, and
for the Soviet player if he did not launch a coordinated strike, each aircraft
carrier under his command may recommend airstrikes against sectors thought to
contain opposing task forces.  The player will be asked to concur with each
strike recommendati to veto it. In addition to strikes against ships, both
players may conduct strikes against enemy bases.  Aircraft carriers may only
launch strikes against ground targets if their task force has been assigned a
mission to do so.  Finally, if NATO aircraft carriers are within 250 miles of
Bodo, the NATO player may launch airstrikes to support the ground battle in
Norway.


8.0	THE COMBAT RESOLUTION SEGMENT:

8.1   GENERAL:    When both players have completed the  Search segment and
have assigned targets for any airstrikes, play progresses to the Combat
Resolution Segment.  During the first portion of combat resolution each player
will be asked to separately view the results of missile strikes against his
forces.  Then the players will be asked to jointly view the results of any
airstrikes. Next, task forces will conduct shore bombardment.  Following shore
bombardments (and amphibious assaults, if any), the computer will determine if
any Soviet SSBNs have been destroyed by NATO ASW forces operating in the
Soviet bastions.

8.2     SURFACE TO SURFACE MISSILE COMBAT:      In this portion of the
resolution, surface ships and submarines in range of detected opposing task
forces may launch attacks against those forces, subject to mission,
initiative,      and reliability. The effectiveness of such strikes will vary
with the units involved, the weapons, distance to the target, and weather
effects.  Each player will separately view the results of these attacks.

8.3     LAND ATTACK CRUISE MISSILE COMBAT:      Task forces and submarines
with an 'Attack Shore Target' mission may launch land attack cruise missiles
at enemy air bases.  These attacks may destroy aircraft on the ground, enemy
air defenses (SAM sites), and may even temporarily put the base out of action.
Conventional missile attacks by themselves are not very effective, but they
can be very important when launched in concert with an airstrike against the
enemy base.

8.4     AIRSTRIKE COMBAT: In this portion of the resolution, airstrikes
ordered against opposing task forces or shore targets will be resolved.  Both
players should view the results together.  The effectiveness of such strikes
will vary with the units involved, the weather, the time of day, and the
distance to the target.  Note that it is possible for the Soviet Air Force (a
separate command from that of the Soviet player) to attack Norwegian airbases
without the Soviet player's foreknowledge or approval.

8.5     SHORE BOMBARDMENT: Task forces of either player having a mission of
'Attack Shore Target' may conduct shore bombardment when in a sector
containing an enemy base. 

8.6 AMPHIBIOUS ASSAULTS: Soviet task forces with amphibious ships may land
troops at Bodo in Norway (Amiga, Atari ST, and IBM-PC versions also allow
landings at Trondheim in Norway, Keflavik in Iceland, and the Faroes north of
Scotland).  Each turn that an amphibious ship is in the target sector, there
is a chance that the associated NATO airbase will fall.

8.7 NORWAY:     Norwegian forces are always under computer control.  Their
ground and air forces will be committed to the ground battle in defense of
Norway.  Their naval forces (primarily submarines) may attack any Soviet task
force that enters Norwegian coastal waters.

8.8     SOVIET SSBNS: Soviet SSBNs are always under the control of the
computer (representing the SSBN forces commander of the Long Range Rocket
Forces).  The computer will sortie the SSBNs out of their bases and to their
assigned patrol bastions. The Soviet player has the responsibility to defend
the bastions against NATO ASW forces.  Each turn, the computer will determine
if sufficient defensive forces are present in each bastion area.  If the
defensive forces are judged to be inadequate against the NATO forces in the
bastion, there is a chance that a Soviet SSBN will be destroyed.

8.9     CONFLICT LEVEL THRESHOLD: Each turn there is a possibility that the
national leadership of one side or the other may decide that escalation above
the current conflict level is acceptable.  The player will not be aware of
this decision, but if he subsequently requests to escalate the level of
conflict, his request will be approved.  At the Tactical Nuclear Warfare level
(Level 3), nuclear weapons may be used against task forces and submarines at
sea.  At the Operational Nuclear Warfare level (Level 4), nuclear-armed cruise
missiles may be used against enemy land bases.  At this level, ICBMs may also
be launched against aircraft carriers and land bases, without the player's
foreknowledge or approval.  For each game, there is a 50 percent chance
(determined at the beginning of the game, and not revealed to the players)
that Operational Nuclear War can ultimately result in a Global Nuclear War,
thus ending the game.


9.0     ENDING OR SAVING THE GAME: The game may end in any of the following
ways.  Both players may jointly agree to stop at the end of a turn; a
ceasefire may be imposed; or the conflict level may escalate to Global Nuclear
Warfare.  In the last two cases, the computer will halt the game.  A ceasefire
will be imposed sometime after the 35th turn if no other criteria for ending
the game is achieved.  If the players have ended the game by joint agreement
then they will be given the option to save the game.  To save the game you
MUST have available another disk that has been previously formatted.  The
computer will prompt you through the save routine.  Unless otherwise
specified, the save routine uses the same drive as the program disk.  Be sure
to remove the program disk when prompted to do so and insert the disk on which
the game will be saved. CAUTION: There is insufficient space on the program
disk to save a game.  Do not attempt to do so.  A spare disk can save up to 5
games in prog .  Be sure to use one.  After saving the game the computer can
be shut down or play may be continued on the next turn of the game just saved
and still in progress.  After ending the game, all destroyed, abandoned, and
damaged units will be listed and the final victory point total for the players
will be displayed.


10.0    VICTORY: At the end of the game (or when the game is ended) the
players will be presented with the final victory point total (unless the game
ends in Global Nuclear War, in which both sides, and everyone else as well,
lose, thus making a sum up display inappropriate).  If the totals are within
100 victory points of one another, the game is a draw.  If the difference in
scores is greater than 100 points the player earning the most points is the
winner.  The  computer automatically awards victory points to the appropriate
player for the following:    1. Damage or    destruction of opposing  units
(variable with unit type and amount of damage to the unit and may be worth up
to 100 points for U.S. aircraft carriers);   2. Demonstrating initial
hostilities restraint (by recommending conflict level 1), 10 points/turn (NATO
player only, since the scenario postulate is based on an aggressive Soviet
stance); 3. Demonstrating threshold restraint (by recommending conventional
war after nu ar war breaks out), 5 points/turn (either or both players); 4.
Sinking Soviet SSBNS, 50 points;  5. Exiting Soviet subs on Anti-SLOC mission,
points equal to the value of the sub plus the number of SSMs on board; 6.
Successful assault of a NATO airbase by airborne or amphibious troops, 100
points;  7. Soviet control of Norway, points equal to the percentage of
Soviet control, with a bonus of 250 points if Norway falls; 8. Each turn that
a Soviet bomber base is inoperative, 5 points/base to NATO; 9. Each turn that
a Soviet bomber base is operational, 3 points/base to USSR;  10. Conducting
shore bombardment and airstrikes against enemy bases (variable with  conflict
level, turn number, and damage inflicted; in general, one earns more  points
for   bombardment and airstrikes against bases when these occur early in the
war).  The computer automatically subtracts victory points from the
appropriate player for the following:  1. Each time that the player escalates
the conflict level above t he highest level previously used in the game (50
points for going to Conventional War, 150 points for Tactical Nuclear War, 300
points for Operational Nuclear War);   2. Each turn  that the player is above
conflict level 2, he loses 10 victory points;  3. Each time that a land base
is destroyed by a nuclear weapon, the attacking player loses 25 victory
points.


11.0	DESIGNER'S NOTES ON PLAY:

11.1  SOVIET STRATEGIC OPTIONS: The Red Army is the senior branch of the
Soviet armed forces.  Consequently, the Soviet player (in his role as Northern
Fleet commander) has a primary responsibility to support the Army's offensive
against Norway.  The primary means of accomplishing this is by conducting
amphibious and airborne assaults against Bodo and Trondheim.  Another
important goal is to prevent the U.S. aircraft carriers from launching
airstrikes in support of the ground battle in Norway or, even worse, against
Soviet military facilities on the Kola Peninsula.  Should the Army's offensive
stall and the war become a prolonged one, it will become necessary to
interdict NATO's trans-Atlantic SLOCS.  Finally, a major war with NATO may
ultimately escalate to a nuclear exchange.  It is essential that the Soviet
SSBN bastions remain secure against NATO ASW forces.  The following
discussions describe some of the strategic options available to the Soviet
side to accomplish these goals.

11.11        ATTACKS  AGAINST NORWAY:   During the first few days of war,
until NATO is able to form a combined force of 3 or 4 aircraft carriers, the
Soviet player should have essentially a free hand in the northern Norwegian
Sea.  During this period, one technique is to organize his surface units into
three task forces with the following objectives.  The helicopter carrier BAKU
should form the basis of an ASW task force operating under land-based air
cover in the Barents Sea bastion area.  A task force centered around the
aircraft carrier TBILISI should be sent approximately 200 nautical miles north
of Bodo to attack the air base there.  An amphibious task force should transit
under cover of the TBILISI to conduct assaults at Bodo. 20 to 40 land-based
bombers should attack Bodo and Trondheim to put the air bases there out of
operation.  Once it is confirmed that Trondheim is neutralized, and if weather
permits, an airborne assault should be conducted there.

11.12   ANTI-AIRCRAFT CARRIER OPERATIONS:       The main striking power of the
NATO fleet resides in its aircraft carrier battlegroups.  Although the Soviet
surface fleet is impressive, it is no match against the 4-5 aircraft carriers
that the NATO player can muster.  The Soviet player will have to rely on his
submarines and land based bombers to counter NATO's carriers.  The carriers
are relatively safe from air attack as long as they remain west of the Iceland
- Faroe - U.K. axis, however, they will have to venture north into the
Norwegian Sea if they are to support the land battle in Norway.  A viable
option for the Soviet player is to sortie his CHARLIE, VICTOR, and MIKE class
submarines, assign them shadow missions, and use them to form a barrier in the
Iceland - U.K. gap.  An alternative employment plan is to send these
submarines on a 'carrier hunt', aggressively pursuing the carriers based on
airsearch or intelligence reports.  The four OSCAR class guided missile
submarines sho tationed northeast of the Faroes in anticipation of the
carriers entering the Norwegian Sea.  When the carriers do transit north, the
Soviet player should launch massive, coordinated strikes against them.  As a
rule of thumb, the Soviet player will need to commit 30-40 bombers for each
opposing aircraft carrier in range.

11.13   DEFENDING THE BASTIONS:  It is essential that adequate forces be
committed to defending the Soviet SSBN bastions.  A possible defensive
deployment is described:   Minefields should be laid between Greenland and
Norway's North Cape.  An ASW task force based on the helicopter carrier BAKU
should be assigned to patrol in the Barents Sea bastion and actively prosecute
submarines detected there.  AKULA and VICTOR III submarines should be given
ASW missions and sent into the Arctic Ocean and Kara Sea bastions.  The TANGO
class diesel subs should be ordered to form a defensive barrier between
Murmansk (M22) and Svalbard.  A reserve force of 3-5 SSNs should be kept in
the Barents Sea. These SSNs should be used to augment defenses in the Arctic
Ocean and Kara Sea bastions should NATO succeed in sinking SSBNs in those
areas.

11.14   ANTI-SLOC OPERATIONS: The success of NATO's strategy of forward
defense is critically dependent on transatlantic reinforcement and supply.  It
is estimated that an average of nearly 80 ships per day must arrive in Europe
to sustain combat and support the population there.  Without reinforcement
shipping, it is possible that NATO could not sustain the fighting in Western
Europe for more than ten days.  Nevertheless, current US wisdom is that the
USSR places a relatively low priority on the anti-SLOC mission, expecting to
achieve a ` quick win' on the ground.  Soviet players wishing to represent
this point of view should assign only a handful of the older VICTOR, CHARLIE,
and TANGO submarines to the Anti-SLOC mission.  Alternatively, one can attempt
to prove the common wisdom wrong, and 'flush' all available subs into the
North Atlantic shipping lanes.  When playing against a human NATO opponent,
this can be worthwhile just to see his reaction.  Note that the Greenland
coastal wa rs, including the Denmark Straits between Greenland and Iceland,
are ice covered.  Submarines in these areas need not fear attack by mines nor
ASW aircraft.  Consequently, this is a good path for subs to take enroute to
the Atlantic shipping lanes.

11.15   SPETSNAZ ATTACKS: The most worthwhile target for the SPETSNAZ is
probably the OTH Radar site in the U.K. A successful attack there will make
the Soviet bombers a much greater threat to the US aircraft carriers.  The
next most important target is the SOSUS facility in Iceland.  An operational
SOSUS system is essential if the P3s in Keflavik are to successfully sink
Soviet submarines.  Least desirable are attacks against airbases, which will,
at best, only destroy a few planes on the ground.  Of course, should this be
an airbase that will be promptly attacked, those few aircraft unavailable for
CAP could prove significant. 

11.16 LAND ATTACK MISSILE STRIKES:      Unlike the U.S., the Soviet Navy has
not placed great emphasis on deploying land attack cruise missiles at sea.  In
the game, only SIERRA and YANKEE class submarines are considered to be armed
with land attack missiles.  Unless at conflict level 4, in which nuclear
attacks against bases are allowed, only the YANKEE class sub has enough
missiles to do more than harass the NATO air bases.  A tactic which
occasionally succeeds is to use the YANKEE's missiles to attack an air base
that is providing CAP coverage to NATO's aircraft carriers.  At the same time,
order a coordinated strike against the  enemy task force.  If the LAMs succeed
in suppressing the air base, then the carriers will find themselves with
substantially less CAP available.  On the other hand, if the LAMs fail to
suppress the air base, then the bombers may find themselves to be in an
uncomfortable (i.e., fatal) situation.

11.2    NATO STRATEGIC OPTIONS: Though the current U.S. doctrine concentrates
on moving forward against Soviet naval facilities and SSBN bastions, the NATO
player's primary objective is to prevent the fall of Norway while minimizing
losses to the US aircraft carriers.  It is also desirable to keep Soviet
submarines from reaching the North Atlantic shipping lanes and attrite Soviet
SSBN forces.  The following guidance is provided to help the NATO player
achieve these goals:

11.21        AIRCRAFT  CARRIER OPERATIONS:      As long as the Kola airbases
have large numbers of bombers available, NATO task forces should not venture
east of the Iceland - Faroes - U.K. axis, unless the force includes at least
2, and preferably 3, full-fledged (i.e., U.S.) aircraft carriers.  This means
that a Soviet amphibious group will probably be able to reach Bodo, however,
it is problematic whether Bodo will fall to amphibious assault.  In any case,
the NATO player will be able to form a four carrier battleforce in time to
prevent total Norwegian collapse.  Expect to encounter substantial submarine
and bomber opposition when operating in the Norwegian Sea.  If SOSUS and the
Keflavik air base are operational, it may be wise to delay coming to Norway's
aid, thus allowing the P-3s can attrite as many Soviet submarines as possible.
Any Soviet task forces encountered should be attacked before they are able to
come within SSM range.  After the situation in Norway is stabilized, an uming
the aircraft carriers have not taken too many losses, the NATO task forces can
sortie north to attack Soviet air bases on the Kola Peninsula and Svalbard.
This should be done with extreme caution, however, as a large number of
fighters are based on the Kola air fields.  These fighters can escort Badger
and Backfire bombers to significant distances, thereby neutralizing the
carriers' CAP and allowing the bombers to launch ASMs against the task forces.

11.22   SUBMARINE OPERATIONS: NATO submarines and other ASW forces should be
assigned four principal tasks: 1) Clearing the Norwegian Sea of enemy
submarines and preventing enemy subs from reaching the Atlantic shipping
lanes; 2) Attacking the Soviet SSBN bastions; 3) Engaging Soviet task forces,
especially those containing amphibious ships; and, 4) Launching land attack
cruise missiles against the Kola air bases.  The NATO player should quickly
seek to establish an antisubmarine barrier in the Greenland Iceland - U.K. gap
consisting of a mix of submarines (STURGEON and UPHOLDER classes) and
minefields.  Once the submarine barrier is in place, it can be gradually moved
northward to sweep the Norwegian Sea clear of Soviet submarines in preparation
for NATO task forces moving in to support Norway.  LOS ANGELES and TRAFALGAR
class submarines should transit immediately to the Soviet SSBN bastion areas.
They should only stop to attack Soviet task forces encountered enroute. Those
LOS ANGEL class subs that are equipped with vertical launched TLAMs should
concentrate in the Barents Sea bastion, so that they will be able to attack
the Kola air bases on short notice.

11.23 LAND ATTACK MISSILE STRIKES:      The NATO player enjoys a considerable
advantage in his land attack missiles (TLAM-C and TLAM-N).  Most of the US
subs and many of the US surface ships carry LAMS, with certain of the LOS
ANGELES subs and SPRUANCE destroyers being very heavily armed.  The NATO
player must resist the temptation to plaster the Kola airfields, for the
effects of missile strikes are only temporary.  It is best to wait until the
carrier groups are ready to sortie into the Norwegian Sea before launching
missiles.  By knocking out one or more of the Kola bases, effective TLAM
strikes can thwart the Soviet's plans to launch massed bomber attacks against
the US carriers.  Be advised that 15-20 (conventional) TLAMs must be launched
at an air base to have a good chance of putting the field out of operation.

11.3    AIRSTRIKES: Although it is hard to turn down the chance to launch an
airstrike, many small strikes can cost dearly in aircraft attrition while
bringing only limited results.  Both players must be willing to be patient,
building up the number of Ready aircraft to allow an overwhelming attack
against a valuable target.  Airstrikes are remarkably powerful when used in
mass since they tend to overwhelm even the most capable defense systems.
Aircraft losses will be heavy, however, and the supply of F-18s, A-6s,
Badgers, and Backfires is not infinite.  The Soviet player in particular
should be aware that to reach NATO task forces beyond the Iceland - Faroes -
U.K. axis, his bombers will have to run a gauntlet of attacks from enemy land
based interceptors.  This is even more deadly when NATO's OTH radar site
provides early warning of the approaching bombers.  When CAP engages multiple
waves of incoming bombers, the first wave to arrive will take the most losses
and subsequent waves w be more likely to get through to their targets.
Finally, note that the U.S. player's A-12 (Advanced Tactical Aircraft) and
F-23 (Advanced Tactical Fighter) incorporate Stealth technology and thus will
be much harder to shoot down with air to air or surface to air weapons.

11.4    WEAPON RANGES: The following ranges (given in nautical miles) apply to
the aircraft and missiles in NORTHERN FLEET: Harpoon and SS-N-22 SSMs (70
nmi); Tomahawk, SS-N-12, and SS-N-19 SSMs (250 nmi); conventional TLAM,
SS-N-21, and SS-N24 missiles (250 nmi); nuclear TLAM, SS-N-21, and SS-N-24
missiles (1500 nmi); F-16, Harrier, and Forger aircraft (250 nmi); P-3C,
Bear-D, Badger, and Backfire aircraft (1500 nmi); all other aircraft (500 nmi,
except that CAP is limited to 250 nmi).  Note that after hostilities begin,
P-3C and Bear-D patrol aircraft will avoid ocean areas that are within range
of enemy CAP intercept.

11.5    EMCON: The surest way to let the enemy know where your forces are is
to let a task force's EMCON level drop to zero.  Every time that the player
communicates with a task force (to give it orders, etc.) its EMCON level is
reduced by 10 percent.  Because a task force must first be detected before it
can be attacked, the wise player will try to maintain radio silence except
when absolutely necessary.

11.6    CONFLICT LEVEL ESCALATION: Every turn each player has the opportunity
to recommend an escalation of the conflict beyond the previous turns' highest
level.  Besides the hefty victory point penalties, there are other
disadvantages to impulsive escalation.  It is not wise to start the war before
your forces are ready.  On the other hand, delaying too long may allow Soviet
submarines to freely enter the Atlantic shipping lanes or NATO submarines to
position themselves in the Soviet bastions.  Escalating to Tactical Nuclear
Warfare is mostly to the Soviet player's advantage, as NATO has very few
nuclear weapons in its naval forces (nuclear weapons are indicated by an
'(N)').  Nuclear land attack missiles can only be used during Operational
Nuclear Warfare, which may result in Global Nuclear Warfare and a premature
end to the game.

J. Baker, S. Newberg, & W. Nichols
