A text representation of the galactic map for Space Rouge.
----------------------------------------------------------


Far Arm Star Cluster

Karonus - Site of Hiathra Starbase and the historic MiCon mining station.
Piracy has been virtuallt wiped out of this sector.

                        G - to Gryphon (8ly)
        Planet
           Hiathra Station
                SUN
                   Hobart's World

 Micon mining Outpost
                               G - to Deneb (17ly)

Gryphon - Convec mining station welcomes all miners, mineralogists, and
tourists. See the deep space monument commemorating the Battle of Binary
Stars.

        G - to Arcturus (9ly)

                Convec mining station           Free Miner's
                    Binary SUN                   territory



   G - to Karonus (8ly)

Arcturus - Micon II mining station awaits the visitor with a taste for
industrial technology. At this writing, Arcturus hosts the Imperium's fab-
ulous carrier Koth, newest addition to the fleet and a shining symbol of
the rule of law in the Far Arm.

(FULL of Gaseous Nebula)
        Micon II Mining Station

                       SUN
        Koth Carrier    Grieger's Planet

  G - to Gryphon (9ly)      G - to Deneb (8ly)

Deneb - Impressive Deneb Prime Starbase is the home of the Duchess Avenstar.
Piracy has been much reduced under her wise rule.

        G - to Arcturus (8ly)           Deneb's Prime Starbase (asteroids)

                        SUN             G - to Nar'see (5ly)
                                Ross mining station

 G - to Karonus(17ly)                           G - to Bassruti(16ly)

Nar'see - Lagrange mining colony produces the finest titanium in the
galaxy. Nar'see's fields of animatter shards have attracted much
attention in popular entertainment; but space is a big place, so they're
easy to avoid.


                                Lagrange mining station
                          SUN
    G - to Deneb(5ly)
                Tlfrugal's planet               G - to Bassruti(11ly)

Bassruti - The free guild independent outpost experiments with new
social attitudes toward taxation and authority. Meanwhile, the advanced
Bassruti Genetic Research Center is making exciting new discoveries
about the nature of life.

G - to Nar'see(11ly)
                Bassruti mining station
                                                G - to Sigure(3ly)
                        Binary SUN
G - to Deneb(16ly)
                                Free guild outpost
             G - to Zed(7ly)

Sigure - Trochal independent outpost stalwartly holds down the frontier
against Manchi incursions. Piracy is no longer a significant problem.

                                                Trochal outpost


                                planet
                        SUN

        G - to Bassruti

Zed - The Micon IV outpost is proud to accounce that the distinguished
gravitation physicist Zoriah Prosk is pursuing further research
breakthroughs in its laboratories. Another sign that the far arm is
attracting the movers and shakers of the Imperium.

         G - to Bassruti

                                        planet

                         SUN
                    Dorf's Planet


          Micon IV mining station



