ZORK 3

The Lake and Aqueduct

Get the lamp and turn it on. Go south to the Junction. Notice your
faithful Elvish sword, stuck in the rock, but you can't take it right
now. Continue south three times to Lake Shore. Turn the lamp off and
drop it. Enter the lake. There are two enemies to watch out for here: a
giant roc above the surface, and a giant fish below it. If you see the
roc, dive to avoid it; if you see the fish, surface.

Dive down. Underwater, you will see a "small, shiny object", "something
sparkling", or "something shiny" in the sand. Take the object. If you
don't get it, keep trying. If you run out of air you will automatically
return to the surface, but you may need to exit the lake and re-enter it
lest you freeze to death from staying in the water too long. (When you
see "You are becoming very weak. You had better leave the water before
you drown!" you have 2 turns to leave the water, or you will die.)

When you have the amulet, surface and go west, then south to Scenic
Vista. Get the torch and wait until the indicator over the viewing table
reads "II". Touch the table. You'll find yourself in Room 8 from Zork
II. Get the grue repellent and wait one turn; you will return to the
Scenic Vista. Wait one more turn (the indicator reads "III"), then touch
the table again. Damp Passage is a location one south and one east from
the Endless Stair at the start of this game. Drop the torch here and
again wait one turn to be returned to the Scenic Vista.

Return north to Western Shore and jump into the lake once more. Dive,
retrieve the grue repellent you dropped, and return to the surface. Swim
across to the southern shore. Apply repellent to me and go south, south,
and east to the Key Room. Get the key. Raise the manhole cover. Go down,
then north three times to the Damp Passage and get the torch. (Hang on
to the empty grue repellent can; we'll be using it later.) You can
return to the Lake Shore for the lamp if you like (nostalgic?), but the
torch will last the rest of the game in this walkthrough.

For Your Amusement: Try to pull the sword from the stone about about 10
times. Get eaten by the roc or the fish. (save first) At On the Lake or
Southern Shore, enter swamp. Eat the algae underwater. Visit Zork I
(indicator "I") and Enchanter (indicator "IV"). (save first for
Enchanter) Be at Aqueduct View (southeast of Lake Shore) or on the
aqueduct at High Arch when the earthquake happens, somewhere around turn
85-130. (save first, unless you've already gotten the key and come back
around to Aqueduct View. if you're on the aqueduct you'll be trapped,
and if you're at Aqueduct View but haven't gotten the key yet, you are
likely to be eaten by grues if you try to retrace your steps back to the
lake from the Key Room, although it is possible to survive the trip by
saving and restoring.) Burn the grue repellent can. (save first)


The Cliff and Land of Shadow

From Damp Passage, go west three times to the Cliff and get the bread.
Go down the rope to Cliff Ledge. Get the chest. Wait on the ledge for a
man to appear at the top of the cliff. Tie the chest to the rope, and
wait again until he reappears. Grab the rope. The man will give you a
wooden staff from the chest. Head back down the cliff twice, and go
south to the Flathead Ocean. Wait until you see a ship. Say hello sailor
(you were waiting for the game where that would do something, wouldn't
you?) and the Viking will throw you a gift. Look, and pick up the vial
and examine it - it's an invisibility potion.

Go east. The Land of Shadow is an area consisting of 8 rooms; you've
just arrived in room 7 (see shadow.gif)

land of shadow map

Wander about in the Land of Shadow until you encounter "a cloaked and
hooded figure". You can also try just waiting when you "hear quiet
footsteps nearby". The elvish sword will now appear in your hand. Attack
the figure repeatedly, but don't kill it. If you seem to be getting hit
a lot, you can leave the room in a direction that the figure is not
blocking and wander around until your wounds heal. When the figure is
"badly hurt and defenseless", take its hood and cloak. Find your way
east out of the Land of Shadow to the Creepy Crawl.

For Your Amusement: Say hello to the man, both while still on Cliff
Ledge and when he is examining his treasure. Throw something at the man
from the cliff. Burn the staff and the trees. (save first) Say "hello
sailor" before the ship arrives, or after it leaves. Enter the quicksand
at the south side of the Land of Shadow. (save first)


The Royal Museum

From the Creepy Crawl, go east twice and south twice to the Great Door.
If by chance the earthquake hasn't happened yet, wait here until it
does. Go east through the "gaping cleft in the rock", then north to the
Technology Museum. Try to read the plaque. Examine the gold machine.
This is a time machine, and the dial displays the current year (948).
Push the gold machine south to Museum Entrance. Open the stone door and
push the gold machine east into the Jewel Room. Read the plaque there.
Dedicated in 777, huh? Turn the dial on the gold machine to 776, then
sit on the seat and push the button. (Don't worry about your
possessions; you can't carry anything with you through time.)

You are now in the Jewel Room in the year 776. Take the ring and wait
until you hear the guards leave. Open the door, go west and open the
wooden door, then go north to the Technology Museum. Look under the seat
of the gold machine. Put the ring under the seat. Sit in the gold
machine again, turn the dial to 948 (your present), and push the button.
Look under the seat and you will retrieve the ring. Stand, open the
door, and go south. Open the stone door and go east to the Jewel Room.
Get all your belongings. Read the plaque again.

For Your Amusement: Be at the Great Door when the earthquake happens.
Hang around in the Royal Museum and try to catch a glimpse of the robot.
(It's annoying, but harmless; it puts things you have moved back into
their places, and closes doors you've left open.) In 776, repeatedly
listen to the guards through the door. Read the plaque in the Technology
Museum in 776. Go to the Museum Entrance and Jewel Room in 777, and
listen to the dedication.


The Royal Puzzle

Go west and south to the Royal Puzzle entrance and read the note.
("Intrepid adventurers do not fear mere warning notes!") Go down into
the Royal Puzzle.

Look. The sandstone "walls" are actually the sides of cubical blocks
that are light enough for you to push and move (unlike the marble that
is mostly the perimeter of the puzzle and a couple of blocks within it).
It is essentially a sliding tile puzzle. Yyou need to get the lore book
that is hiding under one of the blocks and then maneuver a ladder that
is attached to one side of another block into a position that will allow
you to climb back out at the place you came in. There are two blocks
with ladders, but only one can be positioned correctly. The following
sequence of moves will work:

PUSH EAST WALL. S. S. SE. PUSH SOUTH WALL. N. NE. PUSH SOUTH WALL. TAKE
BOOK. PUSH SOUTH WALL. E. NE. PUSH WEST WALL. SW. NW. NE. PUSH SOUTH
WALL. SW. PUSH EAST WALL. NE. PUSH SOUTH WALL. NW. N. N. N. PUSH EAST
WALL. SW. S. SE. NE. N. PUSH WEST WALL. NW. PUSH SOUTH WALL. AGAIN. W.
NW. NW. PUSH SOUTH WALL. SE. SE. SE. NE. PUSH WEST WALL. AGAIN. SW. PUSH
NORTH WALL. AGAIN. AGAIN. NW. UP.


The Mirror Box

Leave the Museum and go to the Engravings Room: north, west, north,
north, west, west, north, east, northeast. If no one is there, leave the
room and return until an old and wizened man appears. Shake the man to
wake him, and then give him the bread. Open the secret door and go north
twice to the Beam Room. Drop the can of grue repellent to block the beam
of light. Go south to the Button Room and press the button. Go north
twice to the Hallway. Notice the mirrored panel that has opened. Go
north one more time and you will now be inside the mirror box.

Read the long description of Inside Mirror carefully. The mahogany panel
moves the whole box when you push it, if the passageway is clear. The
pine panel swings out if you push it, allowing you to exit the box. The
red and yellow panels rotate the box clockwise; the black and white
ones, counter-clockwise. The short pole steadies the box while it moves
north or south, but prevents it from rotating. The compass rose and
T-bar on the long pole indicate the direction the mahogany panel is
facing, thus the directon of movement of the box.

Raise the short pole so you can rotate the box, and push the yellow wall
twice, so the compass rose now points north. Lower the short pole again
and push the mahogany wall three times. Raise the short pole. Push the
white or black walls to rotate the box so the mahogany wall faces south.
Push the pine wall and go north to the Dungeon Entrance.

(The puzzle here is that you've bypassed the twin Guardians of Zork, who
kill anything that comes between them, but can't tell the difference
between their twin and their own reflection. You must have the short
pole in the channel when you move the box because the Guardians can
detect the reflection by the box's wobble if the short pole is not
steadying it. An alternate solution is to drink the invisibility potion
from the vial and walk past while invisible.)

For Your Amusement: Throw something (other than the book, hood or cloak,
staff, key, amulet, or ring, all of which you need to win the game) at
the Guardians of Zork. (When you first enter the mirror box, raise the
short pole, then rotate it so the mahogany wall faces south, and push
the pine wall so you can exit to the north before bypassing them.)


The Dungeon Master

Knock on the door and the dungeon master will answer. Go north, then
east or west, then north twice to the Parapet. Look at the sundial. Turn
the dial to 4, then press the button. Go south, open the door, and go
south into the Prison Cell. Tell the Dungeon Master to go to the
Parapet, then to turn the dial to another number (pick any), then to
press the button. Unlock the bronze door with the key, and then open the
bronze door.

(What's going on here is that the number on the dial summons that cell,
and that cell is returned to its original position when another number
is pressed. You can only unlock the door while in cell 4 and when it is
in its original position.)

Go south into the Treasury of Zork. Congratulations, Dungeon Master!

For Your Amusement: Look into the mirror or knock on the dungeon door
while invisible. Throw something into the flaming pit in the dungeon.

For Your Amusement at various times: Get eaten by a grue (surely you
know how?) - you may run into not merely one grue, but an entire
convention! Repeatedly examine the key.