*********

Welcome to Project 64!

The goal of Project 64 is to preserve Commodore 64 related documents
in electronic text format that might otherwise cease to exist with the
rapid advancement of computer technology and declining interest in 8-
bit computers on the part of the general population. If you would like
to help by converting C64 related hardcopy documents to electronic
texts please contact the manager of Project 64, Cris Berneburg, at
74171.2136@compuserve.com.

Extensive efforts were made to preserve the contents of the original
document.  However, certain portions, such as diagrams, program
listings, and indexes may have been either altered or sacrificed due
to the limitations of plain vanilla text.  Diagrams may have been
eliminated where ASCII-art was not feasible.  Program listings may be
missing display codes where substitutions were not possible.  Tables
of contents and indexes may have been changed from page number
references to section number references. Please accept our apologies
for these limitations, alterations, and possible omissions.

Document names are limited to the 8.3 file convention of DOS. The
first characters of the file name are an abbreviation of the original
document name. The version number of the etext follows next. After
that a letter may appear to indicate the particular source of the
document. Finally, the document is given a .TXT extension.

The author(s) of the original document and members of Project 64 make
no representations about the accuracy or suitability of this material
for any purpose.  This etext is provided "as-is".  Please refer to the
warantee of the original document, if any, that may included in this
etext.  No other warantees, express or implied, are made to you as to
the etext or any medium it may be on.  Neither the author(s) nor the
members of Project 64 will assume liability for damages either from
the direct or indirect use of this etext or from the distribution of
or modification to this etext. Therefore if you read this document or
use the information herein you do so at your own risk.

*********

The Project 64 etext of the Champions of Krynn Rule Book, converted
to etext by Volker Detering <VDetering@aol.com>. Page number
references were preserved, but page lengths vary because of formatting.
"Some aspects of the docs are only IBM-relevant. They must be
converted."

COKRB10.TXT, February 1997, etext #175.

*********

Champions of Krynn Rule Book

TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION                                            1

     Your Game Box Should Contain                       1
     Before You Play                                    1
     Getting Started Quickly                            1
     Using Menus                                        1
     Beginning to Play                                  2
     Modifying Characters and Parties                   2
     Non-Player Characters                              3
     Viewing Characters                                 4
     Character Status                                   4

ADVENTURING                                             5
     Display Screens and Points of View                 5
     Magic                                              5

SPELLS                                                  8

CIVILIZATION                                            8

ENCOUNTERS                                              9
     Combat                                             10



INTRODUCTION

Welcome to the official ADVANCED DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Computer Product,
CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN, a DRAGONLANCE fantasy role-playing epic.  This
game is based on the rules and background created by TSR, Inc. and a
story line created especially for this game.

CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN begins after the War of the Lance.  The evil armies
have been shattered and most of the forces of good have returned to
their homelands, leaving only outposts to safeguard the recovered
lands.  Your goal is to assemble a party of adventurers to serve in
these border outposts.

The newly created party appears at an outpost south of the former
hobgoblin capital of Throtl with orders to scour the area for any sign
of lingering evil. After outfitting your characters with weapons and
armor, the party is ready to begin adventuring.

Your Game Box Should Contain

You should get the following with this game:
 *Disks
 *Adventurer's Journal
 *Rule Book
 *Data Card

These rules are designed to explain all your options and guide you
through playing the game.  If you are not familiar with the ADVANCED
DUNGEONS & DRAGONS game system, you will find helpful information
about how things work in the Adventurer's Journal that came with your
game.

The Adventurer's Journal contains a variety of information including
details about character classes, magic, recent history and an
introduction to the DRAGONLANCE game world.  The Journal also includes
the maps, rumors, and stories that you will need to play the game.  As
you play the game you will discover for yourself which of the tales
you hear are fact and which are fiction.

The Data Card explains how to start the game and select items and menu
options with your computer.  It also shows how to get right into the
game without having to read through the rules.

Before You Play

There is no copy protection on your CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN disk, so please
make backup copies and put the originals away for safekeeping.  When
you start the game, you will be asked to answer a verification
question from this manual or the Adventurer's Journal before you can
play.

Turn to the page as indicated for either this rule book or the
Adventurer's Journal, find the indicated word, type it in and press
the Return or Enter key.

Getting Started Quickly

Use the instructions on the Data Card and load the saved game provided
to begin playing CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN.  Use these rules to answer
questions during play.

Using Menus

All commands are menu based and the concept of the active character is
central to the game.  Outside of combat, the active character's name
is highlighted on the display.  During combat the active character is
surrounded with a cursor at the start of his phase.

In combat the active character is chosen automatically according to
the character's initiative and random factors.  At other times, the
active character may be selected by you before choosing any commands.

If a command affects the whole party, just select the command.  If the
command affects one character, make that character active and then
choose the command.

Example: to look at a character's items, select that character, choose
the VIEW command, and then choose the ITEMS command.  The computer
displays a list of that character's items and their readied status.

-- Page 1 --

Menus are displayed either vertically or horizontally.

Vertical menus select the character, item or spell to be acted upon. 
If there are more choices than will fit on the screen at one time, use
the NEXT and PREV commands to view the additional selections.

Horizontal menus list what that character can do or what can be done
to the character.

In the rules, menus are shown with all of their options.  In some
cases, options will not be available every time a menu appears.

Example:

Treasure Menu

VIEW TAKE POOL SHARE DETECT EXIT

The options TAKE and SHARE will only appear if there is treasure to
take.  The option DETECT will on appear if there is treasure and the
active character has a Detect Magic spell available.

The rule book only lists the general menus.  With many encounters
special menus will appear.

Beginning to Play

To begin playing the game you must load a saved game or generate
characters and band them together into a party.  This first menu gives
you the initial options:

CREATE NEW CHARACTER ADD CHARACTER TO PARTY LOAD SAVED GAME INITIALIZE
MOUSE/JOYSTICK (some computer systems) EXIT TO DOS (some computer
systems)

CREATE NEW CHARACTER is used to build a character.  This command
displays the following menus to define the character.  Detailed
information about characters, races, classes and so on is available in
the Journal.

*  PICK RACE lists seven races a player-character can be on the world
of Krynn.

* PICK GENDER lists the sex the character can be.  Gender affects the
character's maximum strength.

* PICK CLASS lists the class or classes the character is qualified for
based on his race.

* CHOOSE GOD (Clerics only) lists all of the gods available.  Each
deity will confer special powers to clerics.  The god chosen will
determine which alignment options will be available to a cleric. See
the Journal for details.

* PICK ALIGNMENT lists all the possible alignments for the character
based on character class.

The computer randomly generates the character's ability scores.  If
you are not happy with the character's score you may opt to roll them
again.  Remember that you can use the MODIFY CHARACTER command on the
Party Creation/Hall Menu to change the character's ability scores and
hit points after the character has been generated.  On some computer
systems you will be asked to name your character after you have
decided to keep a set of ability scores.  The name may be up to 15
letters long and it will be automatically saved to disk.

* NAME CHARACTER provides a 15 letter space to type in the character's
name.  On some computer systems the character will be named after the
abilities scores are generated.

* SELECT COMBAT ICON allows you to design the shape that will
represent the character in combat.  Customize this icon to represent
the character's favorite weapon, armor and colors. Different computers
and graphic adapters have different capabilities; experiment to create
the best icon for each character.  The combat icon may be altered
during the game to reflect new armor or weapons using the ALTER
command from the Encampment Menu.  On some computer systems the
character will be saved after the combat icon is finished.

-- Page 2 --

* EXIT from any of the character creation menus will display the Party
Creation Menu.

ADD CHARACTER TO PARTY allows you to add characters to the party from
the save game disk.  A party is a group of characters composed of up
to six player characters (called PCs) and up to two non-player
characters (called NPCs).  A party should have a balanced mix of
characters with different classes and races.  For more information
about building parties see the Journal.

LOAD SAVED GAME permits you to resume a game where you had previously
saved it or permits the loading of the party we provided with the game.


INITIALIZE MOUSE/JOYSTICK sets up the joystick or mouse.  Only
available on some computer systems.

EXIT TO DOS ends play.  Only available on some computer systems.

Modifying Characters and Parties

The Party Creation/Hall Menu shows the characters currently in your
party and lists the commands for creating and modifying the party. 
Not all of the options will be available at all times.

PARTY CREATION/HALL MENU

 CREATE NEW CHARACTER
 DROP CHARACTER
 MODIFY CHARACTER
 TRAIN CHARACTER (Hall only)
 KNIGHT CHANGE ORDER (Hall only)
 VIEW CHARACTER
 ADD CHARACTER TO PARTY
 REMOVE CHARACTER FROM PARTY
 LOAD SAVED GAME
 SAVE CURRENT GAME
 BEGIN ADVENTURING
 EXIT TO DOS (some computer systems)

DROP CHARACTER eliminates a character from the party and erases him
from the saved game disk.  A dropped character may not be recovered.

MODIFY CHARACTER can change the character's ability scores and hit
points.  Use MODIFY CHARACTER to change a character generated in
CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN to match a favorite AD&D game character.  A
character cannot be modified once he has begun adventuring.

TRAIN CHARACTER (from Hall Menu only) increases a character's level
when he has gained enough experience points (XP).  Training is free to
all characters. Choose the character to train and if he has sufficient
XP he will be able to advance one level.  If a character has gained
enough XP to advance more than one level, he will advance one level
and then lose all XP in excess of one point below that required for
advancement to the next level.  See the section on Experience Points
in the Journal for an example.  Advancing in levels takes no game time.
 When mages advance, they may be able to add a spell to their grimoire
(spell book).  See the Maximum Level Limits by Race, Class, and Prime
Requisite chart in the Journal for level limits.

KNIGHT CHANGE ORDER (From Hall Menu only) will allow a Knight of
sufficient experience and abilities to petition for admission into the
next higher order. See the section on the Knight Class in the Journal
for details.

VIEW CHARACTER displays a character.  For more information see the
Viewing Characters section.

REMOVE CHARACTER FROM PARTY transfers a character from the party to
the saved game disk.

BEGIN ADVENTURING starts the game.

Non-Player Characters (NPCs)

During the game the party will encounter NPCs.  They may talk to the
party, attack or even offer to join the party.  There are two kinds of
NPCs: those who volunteer to join the party and those who will only
give information or fight the party.

NPCs that join the party are treated like player characters with a few
differences.  The computer commands NPCs in battle.  They

-- Page 3 --

have morale.  If things are going badly for the party, NPCs may run. 
Items can be traded to some NPCs, but they cannot be traded from
conscious NPCs to other characters.  If an NPC dies, however, you can
use the TRADE command on the Item Menu to take his items.  Only two
NPCs at a time may join the party and they may take a share of all
treasures found.

Viewing Characters

The VIEW command displays the character screen from several places in
the game and tells you everything you need to know about the character.


Across the top of most of the game screens are the three moons of
Krynn.  Each moon effects the magical powers of a different group of
mages.  For more information, see the Moons of Magic in the Journal.

Below the three moons is the character's basic information: name, sex,
race, and age, alignment, and character class or classes.  A character
with more than one class has his levels listed in the same order as
his classes.  For example, if a character is a Fighter/Thief with
25,000 XP, his levels are listed as 5/6.

The character's current hit points (HP) and maximum total HP (current
Hp/maximum HP) are also listed here.  At the bottom of this section is
the character's level or levels and current XP.  Across from the
character's name, his current status is displayed.

The next portion of the display shows the character's ability scores
and wealth.

Each character begins the game with a small amount of money with which
to purchase equipment.  Later, as the character accumulates wealth,
the character screen shows how many coins, gems, and jewelry the
character is carrying.  The value of each gem or piece of jewelry
varies and is found when the item is appraised.  Steel coins are the
most valuable, but the relative value of each kind of coin is:

1 steel=2 platinum=2 iron=5 bronze=10 copper=50 silver

Below the ability scores and wealth, the character's Armor Class,
THAC0/, and damage are shown.  For more information about these, see
the Journal section on Combat.

The encumbrance, or total weight the character is carrying, is listed
above the character's combat move.  How far a character can move in
combat is based on his readied armor, strength, and total encumbrance.

The screen then lists the character's readied weapon and armor.

Character Status

OKAY status means that the character has positive HP and can move and
fight normally.

UNCONSCIOUS status means that the character has exactly 0/ HP.  He
cannot move or fight, but is in no danger of dying.

DEAD status means that the character has died.  Non-elf characters
have a chance of being resurrected with a Raise Dead spell.  The
character's chance of being resurrected is influenced by his
constitution.  See the Constitution Chart in the Journal.

FLED status means that the character fled from the previous battle. 
After the battle he will rejoin the party and regain his previous
status.

GONE status means that the character has been totally destroyed. 
Nothing can bring the character back to life.

From the View Menu several options are available to inspect the active
character.  Not all of these commands are available at all times.

VIEW MENU

ITEMS SPELLS TRADE DROP EXIT

ITEMS will show all the equipment the character is carrying.  Items
preceded by a YES are ready for use.  Not all commands in the Item
Menu are always available.

-- Page 4 --

Items Menu READY USE TRADE DROP HALVE JOIN SELL ID EXIT

*READY is used to change the status of a weapon, armor or other item. 
Only readied items can be used in combat.  A character cannot ready
more than two hand-held items at once.  Arrows and crossbow quarrels
are assumed to be in a quiver and can be readied at all times.  Some
items will take both hands when readied (Bows, quarter staffs, etc.),
some take only one (long swords, wands, etc.) and others take no hands
(rings, armor, etc.).  On some systems there are items that can only
be readied or unreadied while in either camp or combat.

*USE activates an item.  If you are using an item in combat, the Aim
Menu will appear if the item can be targeted.  See the Combat section
for details.

*TRADE is used to transfer an item from one character to another. 
Choose the character to trade to and then choose the item or items to
trade.  Remember that a conscious NPC will not give up an item once he
has it.

*DROP permanently removes items from a character.  Dropped items may
not be recovered.

*HALVE will divide a bundle of some item into two bundles.  For
example, halve would turn one bundle of 42 Arrows into two groups of
21 Arrows each.  This is handy for dividing items to distribute among
party members.

*JOIN combines all similar items into one line.  No more than 255
similar items can be joined on one line.  Some items cannot be joined.

*SELL is available under the Armoury Menu and is described there.

*ID is available under the Armoury Menu and is described there.

SPELLS is a listing of the spells a character has memorized and can
cast.

TRADE is used to transfer money, gems and jewelry from one character
to another.  Indicate which character to trade with, and then indicate
what and how much is traded to the other character.

DROP permanently removes money from a character.  Dropped money may
not be recovered.

ADVENTURING

After setting up your party and reading the background information in
the Adventurer's Journal, it is time to head for adventure, fame and
glory.  During your adventuring the party will engage in fierce
battles, find treasures, and sometimes have to stop to recuperate and
memorize spells for future use.

Display Screens and Points of View

CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN uses four different points of view: 3-D, area,
overland, and combat.

3-D appears in towns, underground and so on.  This view appears at the
top, left of your screen and shows the surrounding area from the
party's perspective.  Rotate the party's facing and move using the
directional controls.  The direction controls for your computer are
described on the Data Card.

Area provides an overhead view of the party's surroundings, replacing
the 3-D view.  Choose the AREA command from the Adventure Menu to see
the position of major obstructions such as wells, trees and water.  A
cursor shows the party's position.  On some computer systems, the
cursor is an arrow that indicates current party facing.  The area view
can only be accessed while in 3-D.  On some computer systems you may
move around while in the area view, on others this view is only there
to help you get your bearings.

Overland displays a map of the area of the world of Krynn where
CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN takes place.  This view appears while the party is
moving outside of the outposts or towns.  A cursor shows the party's
current location.  To move on the overland map, move the cursor

-- Page 5 --

with the directional controls along the path the party is to follow. 
A map in the Journal shows the same map with the major locations named.


When in either the 3-D or area view the screen just to the right of
the point of view window will display the current time, facing
direction (N, S, W, E) and what the party is doing (moving, camping,
etc.)

The following menus control most adventuring options:

Adventure Menu MOVE AREA CAST VIEW ENCAMP SEARCH LOOK

MOVE is used to change the party's facing or to move forward.  The
party can turn right or left, turn around, or move forward.  Normally,
each move forward takes 1 minute of game time.  If the party has
search on, each move forward takes 10 minutes.  Refer to the Data Card
for computer-specific details on how to move without choosing the
command.  Select EXIT to get back to the Adventure Menu.

AREA toggles between the area and 3-D view.  If the party is lost or
in unfamiliar territory this command may not be available.

CAST displays the Cast Menu so the active character can throw a magic
spell. See the section on Magic in the Journal for a description of
how to cast spells and their effect.  Some spells only have an effect
in combat.

VIEW displays the character screen and the View

ENCAMP displays the Encamp Menu.  See the Encamp section for a
description of the available commands.

SEARCH toggles searching on and off.  A party moving with search off
is moving at a normal rate and takes 1 minute per move.  With search
on the party takes 10 minutes per move because they are checking for
secret doors, traps, etc. When a party has search on, SEARCH will be
displayed on the screen to the right of the point of view window. 
Because the party is moving very slowly with search on, the chance for
random encounters is greatly increased.

LOOK is used to search an individual square.  Executing a LOOK command
acts as if the party moved into the current square with search on.

Encamp

The commands on the Encamp Menu include day-to-day functions such as
saving the game, resting to heal, memorizing spells and changing game
items such as game speed or party order.

Encamp Menu

SAVE VIEW MAGIC REST ALTER FIX EXIT

SAVE writes the characters and current game to the save game disk so
that you may resume the game at that point in the future.  Saved games
may be loaded either at the first menu or from Party Creation/Hall
menu.  Saving often is a good idea, especially after surviving really
tough encounters.  Prepare a save game disk according to the
instructions on the Data Card.

VIEW displays the View Menu and the character screen of the active
character.

MAGIC is a very important part of CHAMPIONS OF KRYNN and is described
under its own heading.  Magical spells can only be memorized while the
party is encamped.

REST allows characters to memorize spells and to heal naturally. 
Characters catch their normal sleep without having to encamp.  When
spells are being memorized, the initial rest time is established by
the time necessary to memorize any spells selected from the MEMORIZE
command in the Magic Menu.  For every 24 uninterrupted hours of rest
in camp, each wounded character regains one hit point.  Rest can be
interrupted.  If possible only take long rests in safe places, such as
inns or places messages describe as safe.

Rest Menu

REST DAYS HOURS MINUTES ADD SUBTRACT EXIT

*REST begins the resting process.  Unless interrupted, the party will
rest for the time indicated.

-- Page 6 --

*DAYS, HOURS, MINUTES selects the unit of time to be changed by the
ADD and SUBTRACT options.  This option is not available on all
computer systems.

*ADD, SUBTRACT increases or decreases the time that the party will
attempt to rest.  Decreasing the time may not allow spell-casters to
memorize all of their spells.

ALTER is used to change the characters in the party and the parameters
of the game.  The Alter Menu includes:

Alter Menu

ORDER DROP SPEED ICON PICS LEVEL EXIT

*ORDER changes how the characters are listed on the screen and how
they are deployed in combat.  Characters at the top of the list tend
to be in the front line in combat.

*DROP eliminates a character from the party and erases him from the
saved game disk.  A dropped character is gone forever and may not be
recovered.

*SPEED controls the rate at which messages are printed on screen.  If
the game is running too slowly, use the FASTER command to speed up the
displays.

Speed Menu

SLOWER FASTER EXIT

*ICON is used to change a character's combat icon.

*PICS governs encounter pictures.

Pics Menu

MONSTERS ON/OFF ANIMATIONS ON/OFF EXIT

*MONSTERS ON/OFF toggles the close-up pictures of encounters on and
off. Turning the pictures off speeds up the game.  This command may
vary a little on some systems.

*ANIMATIONS ON/OFF toggles the animation of the close-up pictures on
and off. Turning the animation off speeds up the game.  This command
is not available on some computers.

*LEVEL permits you to affect combat difficulty.  The difficulty of the
various combats in the game may be adjusted by using the ALTER command
in the Encamp Menu.  After choosing ALTER and the LEVEL, you will see
the following menu:

Level Menu

NOVICE SQUIRE VETERAN ADEPT CHAMPION

The game is preset at the Veteran level.  This is the level at which
we consider the game to be balanced.  To make the combats easier,
choose either the Novice (easiest) or Squire level.  To make the
combats more difficult, choose either the Adept or Champion (hardest)
level.

When you choose to make the game more difficult, you are rewarded by
receiving more experience points from your combats.  When you choose
to make the game easier, you are penalized by receiving less
experience points from your combats.

Receiving less experience points will slow the rate at which your
characters advance levels.  Advancing at a slower rate will give you
less powerful characters which, in the long run, may more than offset
the benefits of playing at an "easy" level.

FIX is used to heal many wounded characters with a single command. 
All characters with first level clerical spells will memorize as many
Cure Light Wounds as they can, cast them on the party, and then
rememorize their previously memorized spells automatically.  FIX takes
game time and may be interrupted by an encounter.  FIX will not return
HP to diseased characters, a Cure Disease spell must first be cast
upon them.

Magic

To get the Magic Menu options, the active character must be able to
cast spells.  Spell-casters can get a list of their memorized spells
from the CAST option of the Magic Menu or from the SPELLS option of
the View Menu.  They can get a list of their spells on scrolls from
the SCRIBE option of the Magic Menu.

-- Page 7 --

Magic Menu

CAST MEMORIZE SCRIBE DISPLAY REST EXIT

CAST displays the Cast Menu and the character s list of memorized
spells. Select the spell to cast and then indicate the target of the
spell.  Once a spell is cast it is gone from memory until it is
memorized again.  Some spells only have effect when cast during combat
and others may only be cast while encamped.

MEMORIZE displays the Memorize Menu, character s grimoire of spells or
clerical spell list, and how many spells of each level the spell-
caster may memorize. Once all characters have selected the spells they
want to memorize, choose the REST command to take the time to actually
memorize the spells.  Remember that a spell-caster can have the same
spell memorized multiple times and that the moons may increase the
number of spells a mage may cast.  When mages have bonus spells they
may be of any level, but clerical specials may only be those listed
under special.

Memorize Menu

MEMORIZE NEXT PREV EXIT

* MEMORIZE selects a spell for memorization.  A spell is not actually
memorized until it has been chosen from the Memorize Menu and the
character has rested long enough to imprint the spell on his mind. 
After selecting the spells to memorize, the computer will verify your
choices.

SCRIBE displays the Scribe Menu and a list of all of the spells on
mage scrolls.  Before spells can be scribed, they must either be
identified in a shop (such as an Armoury) or the mage must have cast
Read Magic on them. Indicate the spells to be scribed into the
character s spell book.  Once all characters have indicated the spells
they want to scribe, choose the REST command to take the time to
actually scribe the spells.  Scribing a spell takes the same amount of
time as memorizing the spell.

Scribe Menu SCRIBE NEXT PREV EXIT

DISPLAY lists the magic that currently affects the party.  This
includes spells like Bless or Invisibility plus effects like disease. 
This is an important command because diseased characters will not
regain HP until they have a Cure Disease spell cast on them.

REST displays the Rest Menu referred to in the Encamp section.  A
character s spells are not memorized until he has rested the necessary
time.

SPELLS

Spells are defined by who can cast them (cleric, white mage, red mage),
when they can be cast, and their range, duration, area of effect, and
of course their actual effect.  The Spell Parameters List in the
Journal summarizes all of the available spells.  When using spells
from the Encamp Menu or the Adventure Menu (such as Find Traps),
remember that one round equals one minute of game time and one turn
equals 10 minutes of game time.  For more information about magic and
the effects of spells look in the Journal.

CIVILIZATION

Civilization provides many valuable services for the adventurer. 
Generally only Outposts will have Inns, Armouries, Halls, Temples and
Bars, but some may be found in towns and elsewhere.  When you are in
an Outpost a menu like the following may appear, allowing you to
select where you would like to go:

Outpost Menu

HALL TEMPLE BAR NEXT PREV LEAVE

PLACE OPTIONS (Hall, Temple, etc.) will take you to the selected
establishment and give you all appropriate options.  There is a
description of these places following this menu.

NEXT, PREV display other place options.

LEAVE will take the party out of the outpost, into the overland map.

-- Page 8 --

Inns provide a safe place to rest using the Encamp Menu.  While the
characters rest they can memorize spells and regain hit points.

Armouries provide a place to buy and sell equipment using the Armoury
Menu.

Armoury Menu

BUY VIEW TAKE POOL SHARE APPRAISE EXIT

BUY displays the items available in the armoury.  Select the items
that the active character will

VIEW displays the character screen with the SELL and ID commands
available in the Items Menu.

* SELL causes the armourer to make an offer on the highlighted item. 
Sold items may not be recovered.

* ID is used to identify an item.  The armoury charges 100 steel
pieces for the service.

TAKE is used to pick up coins from the party s money pool.  Indicate
the type and amount of coins, gems, or jewelry to take.

POOL places all of the party members coins, gems, and jewelry into a
pool which any member may use to make purchases.  Use the TAKE or
SHARE commands to pick up coins, gems and jewelry from the money pool.

SHARE picks up everything from the pool and distributes even shares
among the party.

APPRAISE is used in armouries to place a monetary value on gems and
jewelry the character has.  Choose the item to be appraised and the
armourer will make an offer.  Accept the offer and the item is sold. 
Reject the offer and the gem or piece of jewelry becomes an items on
the character s item list.

Halls are where the characters can advance levels and modify the party
using the Party Creation/Hall Menu.  Halls are also where knight
characters may petition for admission into a higher knight order.  For
more about the Solamnic Knights, see the character classes section in
the Journal.

Temples can cast healing spells and perform other clerical services. 
The commands on the Temple Menu are the same as those on the Armoury
Menu with the addition of the HEAL command.

Temple Menu

HEAL VIEW TAKE POOL SHARE APPRAISE EXIT

HEAL displays a list of the temple s healing spells.  Indicate the
spell to cast and confirm that the character is willing to pay the
cost.  The cost may vary depending on the recipient and circumstances.

Bars are rowdy places full of gossip, stories, and information.  Buy a
round of drinks and listen to the stories.

Vaults are a service of the Solamnic Knight orders.  They will
safeguard money in deposits of 100 steel pieces for adventurers. 
Careful records are kept by the orders, so if you deposit money at one
outpost, they will allow you to withdraw at another.  There is a small
(20 steel piece) fee for this service.

Commandant s office is where to go to get orders and current
information.  This is a very important place to visit during the
course of your adventures.

ENCOUNTERS

When a party comes across monsters or NPCs, an encounter occurs.  If
the party attacks immediately it may receive a bonus to its initiative
in combat.  If the monsters surprise the party, the monsters can
attack immediately and get a bonus to their initiative in combat.  If
the monsters do not attack immediately, the party can react by
choosing from an Encounter Menu.  Encounter Menus vary between
situations and give you a list of your options for that moment.  This
is one possible example of such a menu:

Encounter Menu

COMBAT WAIT FLEE ADVANCE/PARLAY

COMBAT causes the party to attack the monsters.  Fighting is explained
in the Combat section.

WAIT allows the monsters to decide what to

-- Page 9 --

do.  They may attack, wait, flee, advance (if they are far away) or
parlay (if they are adjacent.)

FLEE causes the party to run away.  If the monsters try to attack, and
are faster than the party, combat will occur.  If the party is faster
it may successfully flee.

ADVANCE reduces the range to the monsters.  When the monsters are
adjacent to the party the ADVANCE command is replaced by the PARLAY
command.

PARLAY allows the party to speak with monsters.  Select the active
character and then choose a conversation tactic from the Parlay Menu.

Parlay Menu

HAUGHTY SLY MEEK NICE ABUSIVE

* HAUGHTY means that the speaker is trying to demonstrate his
superiority over the monsters.

* SLY means that the speaker is trying to get information out of the
monsters without their realizing.

* MEEK means that the speaker is trying to convince the monsters that
the party is not worth attacking.

* NICE means that the speaker is trying to be nice to the monsters.

* ABUSIVE means that the speaker is trying to browbeat or threaten
information out of the monsters.

Combat

In combat the computer chooses the active character.  Characters with
higher dexterity will tend to go before characters with lower
dexterity.  A character may hold his action until later with the DELAY
command.  There is a more detailed description of combat in the
Journal.

The screen begins a character s combat phase centered on that
character.  The character s name, HP, AC, and current weapon are
displayed.  The Combat Menu lists the character s options.

Combat Menu

MOVE VIEW AIM USE CAST TURN YELL DONE

MOVE is used to allow a character to move.  Attack by moving the
character into an enemy s square.  If the character moves away from an
adjacent enemy, the enemy gets a free attack at the character s back.

VIEW displays the character screen and View Menu.  The USE command
appears on the Item Menu and permits the use of an item, such as a
wand, in combat.

AIM is used to aim a weapon or spell.  When aiming a ranged weapon,
the range to the target will be displayed above the menu bar on some
systems.  If a character moves adjacent to an enemy, and has no more
movement left, the AIM command can be used to attack with a melee
weapon (sword, mace, etc.).  The AIM command can also be used to
survey the condition of your party and your enemies.  As you move the
aim cursor over a character, information about him will be displayed
on the right of your screen.

Aim Menu

NEXT PREV MANUAL TARGET CENTER EXIT

* NEXT is used to look at all possible targets, starting with the
closest target and then going to the next closest.  NEXT and PREV only
indicate targets in the character s line of sight.

* PREV (Previous) is the opposite of the NEXT command.  Use this
command to look at the possible targets starting with the farthest
target and working back toward the character.  This command is most
often used to select a target for a missile or magic attack.

* MANUAL permits the player to aim anywhere on the map. Only targets
in the character s line of sight can actually be fired at.

* TARGET is used to fire a missile or spell at the enemy where the
cursor is currently located.  This command can also do a

-- Page 10 --

melee attack on an adjacent enemy.  If this option is not displayed
the target is out of range, not in line of sight, invisible or under
the effect of a Blink spell.

* CENTER will center the screen around the cursor.  This is helpful
when manually targeting ranged weapons and spells.  This option is not
available on all computer systems.

USE allows a character to activate an item without having to go
through the View Menu.  Items like scrolls and wands may then be
targeted with the Aim Menu.

CAST is only available to spell-casters when they have spells
available.  The spell-caster selects from the list of available spells
and then targets with the Aim Menu.  If the character has been hit
recently his concentration may be broken and the CAST option will not
appear.

TURN allows clerics to attempt to destroy undead monsters or turn them
away from the party.  This has no effect on any other kind of monster.

YELL will allow an active Kender character to taunt enemy troops.  The
taunt will only work against intelligent opponents and they must save
against magic or attack in a berserker rage.  Opponents that fail
their save will direct most of their efforts against the Kender and
suffer a -2 THAC0/ and a +2 AC for the duration of the combat.

DONE is used to bring up the secondary combat menu.

Done Menu

GUARD DELAY QUIT BANDAGE AUTO SPEED EXIT

* GUARD sets a character to stand and attack the first enemy that
moves adjacent.  GUARD is only an option of a character is armed with
a melee weapon.

* DELAY causes the character to hold his turn until after the other
characters and monsters have acted.

* QUIT ends a character s turn.

* BANDAGE only appears if a party member is bleeding to death.  The
BANDAGE command will stop the bleeding and keep the character from
dying.

* AUTO turns control of the character over to the computer. See the
Data Card for instructions on how to regain manual control of a
character.  Under computer control, a fighting character with a
readied missile weapon will tend to hang back and attack from a
distance.  If the character has no readied missile weapon, he will
ready a melee weapon and charge.  Characters will remain under
computer control for all subsequent combats until manual control is
again selected. When a spell-caster character is on auto, you may
toggle his spell casting on and off.  To see how to do this on your
computer consult your Data Card.

* SPEED changes the game speed and is described under the ALTER
command in the encamp menu.

When combat is over you will see how much XP each character receives
and then the Treasure Menu is displayed.  Most of the Treasure Menu
commands work like the commands in the Temple and Armoury Menus.

Treasure Menu

VIEW TAKE POOL SHARE DETECT EXIT

VIEW displays the character screen and View Menu.

TAKE permits the active character to pick up treasure from defeated
monsters. This will only appear if the monsters had a treasure or the
party has pooled its funds.  A character carrying a large number of
coins and heavy equipment can be slowed in combat.

-- Page 11 --

Take Menu

ITEMS MONEY EXIT

* ITEMS lists the equipment in the treasure.  Frequently, the weapons
and armor used by monsters are not listed because they are substandard
and not worth taking.

* MONEY displays the number and type of coins, gems and jewelry in the
treasure.  Indicate the type then number of items the active character
takes.

POOL drops all of the party members coins into the treasure.  Use the
TAKE or SHARE command to pick up coins from the treasure.

SHARE picks up the money treasure, divides it into shares, and
distributes it among the party.

DETECT casts a Detect Magic spell from the current active character. 
Magic items in the treasure will be marked with a + or an * .  This
option will only appear if the active character has a Detect Magic
spell available.

EXIT leaves the scene of the battle.  If treasure remains, then the
option to return to the Treasure Menu is displayed.

-- Page 12 --

*********

End of the Project 64 etext of the Champions of Krynn Rule Book.

*********
