                     BATTLES OF NAPOLEON
              Strategic Simulations, Inc. (SSI)         
                         Game Rules
TABLE OF CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

1.0 START-UP
ù Documentation Check

2.0 PREPARING TO PLAY
ù Movement Option

3.0 STARTUP MENUS
ù Main Menu

4.0 PLAYING THE GAME
ù The Game Menu
ù Computer Directive Table
ù Sound
ù Delay Time
ù Sequence of Play

5.0 OBJECTIVE PHASE
ù Objective Phase Information Area
ù Objective Selection
ù Objective Effects
ù Changing Objectives
ù Exiting the Objective Phase

6.0 OPERATIONS PHASE
ù Command Menu
ù Movement Orders
ù Fire and Melee Orders

7.0 COMBAT PHASE
ù Cavalry Charge Phase
ù Artillery Fire Phase
ù Fire Phase
ù Melee Phase
ù Fire Effects

8.0 DISRUPTION, READINESS, MORALE, FATIGUE, AND EFFICIENCY
ù Fatigue
ù Morale
ù Efficiency
ù Readiness
ù Disruption

9.0 COMMAND CONTROL
ù Leaders
ù Specific Effects of Command Control

10.0 RECOVERY, REINFORCEMENT, AND RESUPPLY
ù Ammunition
ù Rally
ù Recovery
ù Reinforcements

11.0 VICTORY PHASE
ù Victory Points

12.0 DESIGNING YOUR OWN SCENARIOS

13.0 HISTORICAL SCENARIOS

Borodino: The Battle for the Great Redoubt
ù French Order of Battle
ù Allied Order of Battle

The Battle of Auerstadt
ù French Order of Battle
ù Prussian Order of Battle

The Battle of Quatre Bras
ù French Order of Battle
ù Allied Order of Battle

The Battle of Waterloo
ù French order of Battle
ù Allied Order of Battle
BATTLES OF NAPOLEON
GAME RULES

PARTS INVENTORY:
Your Battles of Napoleon game should come with the following:
ù One Game Box
ù This Rules Book
ù One Game Disk
ù One Scenario Disk


INTRODUCTION

The Battles of Napoleon is a grand tactical simulation of
Napoleonic warfare. You may play any of the four historical
Battles provided with the game, or you may design your own
scenarios using the game Editor included with the game. In this
Editor, you may either reconstruct a favorite historical battle,
or have the computer randomize a "hypothetical" battle.

In The Battles of Napoleon, you will command either the French or
the Allied forces against a human or a computer opponent. As
commander of these forces, you will move your units over the game
map and resolve combat. Your main responsibilities are to choose
objectives for your units, move them so as to optimize your
tactical situation, and give them combat orders.

The capabilities of this game are tremendous, allowing you to
give very detailed commands to your forces and, through use of
the Editor, to change the very tables which govern how the game
operates. However, this level of detail and control makes this
game relatively complex. We therefore recommend that you use the
Borodino scenario as a guideline for learning this game, saving
the Editor for when you are more familiar with the system. The
Borodino scenario is a very small scenario with only about 20
units on each side, and is therefore well suited to a new player
of this game. See section 13.1 for more information on the
Borodino scenario.

The rules are organized so that the sections pertaining to the
Editor are in the latter half of the rulebook. Therefore, only
read through section 13 before beginning play. The latter
sections will only be necessary once you are more familiar with
the game. For a quick start into the game, read only through
section 7.0 and then begin.

Note that there are examples throughout these rules. They are not
taken from any specific scenario and are only for reference with
regard to the specific example.

Time and Distance
The game is played in turns. Each turn equals one-half hour of
real time and is divided into a number of phases (refer to
section 4.5 for a listing of these phases). Each square on the
game map represents 100 yards on a side. It should be mentioned
that these scales can change with use of the Editor.


1.0 START-UP

Before beginning play, it is a good idea to make backup copies of
your disks. You may do this with any commercially available bit
copier (or using you DOS on the IBM system). Once you have made
these backup copies, put your master disks in a safe place and
play off your copies. This will keep your master disks safe and
will help prevent loss of the game through disk wear.

C-64/128
If you have a C-64 or C-128 computer, you begin the game by
inserting the Scenario Disk in your disk drive and then turning
on your computer. Remember to hold down the Commodore key on the
C-128 to enter C-64 mode. When your computer comes up and says
READY, type LOAD "*",8,1 and press RETURN. When READY appears
again, type RUN and press RETURN.

Apple II
If you have an Apple II series computer, you load the game by
inserting the front side of the Scenario Disk in your disk drive
and turning on your computer. Note that if your system has a CAPS
LOCK key, it must be down throughout the game. Once you have
turned on the computer, the game will load normally. Answer the
prompts as they appear in regards to your preferences for usage
of the numeric keypad (if you have one) and accelerator cards.

NOTE: Older versions of the "Speed Demon" that do not contain dip
switches may not work properly with this game.

IBM PC or compatible
If you have an IBM PC or compatible, you load the game by first
booting the computer with a DOS version 2.0 or later. If you
intend to save the game, you should have a formatted disk ready
for this purpose. When the system prompt appears (typically A>)
insert the game disk and type START. Hit RETURN and the game will
load. You will then get the option for numeric keypad movement
(see section 2.1).

1.1 Documentation Check

There is no physical copy protection in this game. This permits
you to make back-up copies of the game and/or install it on a
hard disk. Note that Apple users will not be able to install this
program on a hard disk due to limitations of the operating
system. There are documentation checks in the game that will
require you to look up a word in a specific section of this
rulebook and type it in when prompted. After typing in the
requested word, press RETURN and the game will continue.


2.0 PREPARING TO PLAY

When the game is loaded, you will be required to answer a
documentation check (see section 1.1 above) before you can
proceed. Following this, you may be given an option to choose
between the standard and keypad movement options (refer to
section 2.1). Apple Users will then be asked to identify the type
of accelerator card their system is using (if any).

2.1 Movement Option

If you are using a system with a numeric keypad, you must choose
which number keys you will use to move your units and the game
cursor. This is done from the Select Movement Option Screen that
appears following the Documentation Check. When
SELECT MOVEMENT OPTION (1) STANDARD (2) KEYPAD
is shown on the screen, press the "1" key if you intend to use
the numbers across the top of your keyboard. Press the "2" key if
you intend to use your numeric keypad. All examples in this
rulebook will use the "1" option as not all systems have numeric
keypads.


3.0 STARTUP MENUS

3.1 Main Menu

This menu follows the title Screen and is where you select
whether you wish to CREATE A RANDOM NEW SCENARIO, EDIT A
SCENARIO, GENERATE A SCENARIO, PLAY A SCENARIO, or RECALL/PLAY A
SAVED GAME. To choose one of the functions, simply select the
first letter of the option. Thus, pressing the "P" key will allow
you to PLAY A SCENARIO. See section 14.2 for an explanation of
the use of the Random Scenario Maker.

3.11 SCENARIO SELECTION MENU
This is the menu you reach after pressing the "P' key from the
Main Menu and allows you to choose which scenario you wish to
play. Press the "W" key to play the Battle of Waterloo; press the
"Q" key to play the Battle of Quatre Bras; press the "A" key to
select the Battle of Auerstadt; press the "B" key to play the
Battle of Borodino; select the "G" key to play a battle you have
created earlier though use of the Editor; or press the "E" key to
return to the Main Menu. Refer to section 13.0 for a description
of the Historical Scenarios.

3.12 GENERATE/EDIT SCENARIO MENU
If you select the "G" key from the Main Menu, you will be
presented with this menu. From here you may select any of the
primary options of the Editor portion of the game. Consult
section 14.0 for more details on the Editor portion of this
program.

3.13 SAVE GAME MENU
This menu allows you to interact with your save disk, either to
recall a game, initialize a disk (only on the Apple and C-64
versions of the game), delete files, and catalog the disk. If
this menu was reached by selecting a save option, then you will
be allowed to save the game through this menu. If, however, this
menu was reached from a recall option, then you will be allowed
to recall a previously saved game instead.


4.0 PLAYING THE GAME

Because of the complexity of this game, it is important that you
understand how a game of The Battles of Napoleon is played. The
menus that follow will show you how to begin a game, but let's
first examine the general flow of the game.

A game of The Battles of Napoleon consists of many game turns,
each of which is broken down into many phases (see section 4.5
for the sequence of play for each game turn). Over these turns,
the player(s) will move units across the map and combat will be
resolved. The object of the game is to inflict more casualties on
your opponent's forces than he/she inflicts on yours. In
addition, there are often places on the map that are worth
"victory points" for being captured (see section 11.0 for Victory
Points).

At this point, you should skip ahead and read the initial portion
of sections 5.0, 6.0, and 7.0. These section introductions will
give you an overview of how the game is played. Armed with this
information, you should then proceed through the rest of this
section, paying close attention to the Sequence of Play, section
4.5.

4.1 THE GAME MENU

The game Menu appears after you select which game you wish to
play, be it a historical scenario or a previously generated
scenario. This menu presents a number of options which affect how
the game will play. All of the default settings should be used
for a "historical" setting. This menu appears as follows:
A) MOVE FIRST              FRENCH       ALLIED
B) FRENCH                  HUMAN        COMPUTER
C) ALLIED                  HUMAN        COMPUTER
D) LEVEL OF PLAY           1 2 3 4 5
E) 2 PLAYER                HIDDEN       NON-HIDDEN
F) FRENCH STRENGTH         1 2 3 4 5
G) ALLIED STRENGTH         1 2 3 4 5
H) FRENCH ARRIVAL          1 2 3 4 5
I) ALLIED ARRIVAL          1 2 3 4 5
J) FRENCH AMMO             1 2 3 4 5
K) ALLIED AMMO             1 2 3 4 5

4.11 GAME MENU OPTIONS
ù The "A" Option allows the player to select which side will move
first. Press the "A" key until the desired side is highlighted.

ù The "B" and "C" options allow the player(s) to select whether or
not to have either the French or the Allied side controlled by
the computer.

ù The "D" option selects the difficulty level. Level 3 is normal
and does not modify the game. Levels 1 and 3 favor the French
player, 1 more so than 2, while levels 4 and 5 favor the Allied
player, 5 more so than 4. Level of play affects the casualties
inflicted by fire and melee combat. It is suggested that you
select the easiest level of play when starting out as the game is
a challenge on level 3.

ù The "E" option allows you to play a game where only known enemy
units of both Combat and Operations Phases. This option is only
available during a game between two human players

 The "F" and "G" options allow the player to boost the strength
of the units on the French and Allied sides, respectively. Level
3 is normal strength. Higher numbers increase the number of men
in the units on the side chosen, while lower numbers decrease the
number of men in those units. It is recommended that level 3 be
used in most circumstances.

ù The "H" and "I" options allow the player to alter the arrival
time of reinforcements for the French and Allied sides,
respectively. Level 3 is historical with no changes. Level 1
allows units to arrive up to four turns earlier than their
historical arrival time while level 2 allows units to arrive up
to four turns later. Level 4 allows units to arrive anywhere from
2 turns earlier than historical to two turns later. Level 5 is
identical to level 4, except that it allows up to 4 turns of
early or late arrival. Once players are familiar with the game,
level 5 should be chosen to truly re-create the uncertainty of a
battle where opposing commanders did not know the size of an
enemy force or how quickly it would be reinforced.

ù The "J" and "K" options allow for variable ammunition supply.
Level 3 is again historical. Levels 2 and 1 give progressively
less ammunitions where levels 4 and 5 give progressively more.

4.2 Computer Directive Table

This table is displayed immediately after exiting the Game Menu,
if you selected the computer to play one (not both) of the sides.
This table allows you to choose the overall strategy to be
employed by the computer opponent. If you have no special
strategy in mind, select option "A". Option "A" allows the
computer the most flexibility in choosing a strategy. All other
options are actually just variants of option "A" with weighting
towards various strategies. The rest of the options have the
following effects:

ù The Retreat-Automatic option forces the computer to retreat its
forces without regard to the location of your forces. The
computer will simply give ground and you must pursue.

ù The Retreat-Random option is identical to the Retreat-Automatic
option except that the computer will vary the speed of its
retreat at random.

ù The Retreat-Analyze Situation option forces the computer to give
ground, but only is in response to your attacks. The computer
will generally hold unless approached.

ù The Hold Positions-Automatic option makes the computer try to
hold its current positions. The computer will not retreat unless
pushed back by combat, in which case it will try to retake the
terrain lost.

ù The Hold Positions-Random option allows the computer the most
variety in its disposition. Sometimes it will aggressively hold a
certain position, refusing to retreat and counterattacking if
forced back, while other times the computer will hold for just a
short while and then pull back to a safer line.

ù The Hold Positions-Analyze Situation option forces the computer
to hold a specific position, but allows it to retreat or advance
as needed in order to best counter your aggressive moves. This is
best described as putting the computer in "reaction" mode where
it reacts to your moves.

ù The Counterattack-Automatic option is the most aggressive
computer setting. The computer will relentlessly push against
your forces all along the line. You will never be given a moment
of rest.

ù The Counterattack-Random option is just like the Counterattack-
Automatic option except that the computer will vary the speed of
its advance randomly.

ù The Counterattack-Analyze Situation is the mode in which the
computer is allowed to attack cautiously, maneuvering its forces
to allow maximum concentration of firepower against its
objective. In this mode, the computer is not just trying to push
you back, it is trying to take a specific objective and will
maximize its efforts in this direction.

4.3 Sound

After exiting from the Game Menu, you will see a number of
screens that display the losses suffered by both sides and the
current score. These screens are more fully explained in section
10.0. After these screens you will be allowed to select "Y" or
"N" to the question "SOUND ON?". If you wish no sound during the
play of the game, select "N". Otherwise, select "Y".

4.4 Delay Timer

The next screen after the Sound On screen instructs you to set
the Delay Timer. The timer determines how long messages remain on
the screen during the game. You should play once with the default
setting before choosing a different number. If the messages go by
too fast or too slow, then you can change this delay in a later
turn.


4.5 Sequence of Play

1. Command Control Phase
2. Mutual Operation Point Phase (Turn 1 only)
3. Reinforcement Phase (not on Turn 1)
4. Ammo Resupply (Not on Turn 1)
5. 1st Player Leader Transfer Phase
6. 1st Player Objective Phase
7. 1st Player 1st Operation Phase
8. 1st Combat Phase
9. 1st Player Recovery/Operation Point Phase
10. 2nd Player Rally Phase
11. 2nd Player Leader Transfer Phase
12. 2nd Player Objective Phase
13. 2nd Player 1st Operations Phase
14. 2nd Combat Phase
15. 2nd Player Recovery/Operation Point Phase
16. 1st Player Rally Phase
17. 1st Player 2nd Operations Phase
18. 3rd Combat Phase
19. 1st Player Recovery/Operation Point Phase
20. 2nd Player Rally Phase
21. 2nd Player 2nd Operations Phase
22. 4th Combat Phase
23. 2nd Player Recovery/Operation Point Phase
24. 1st Player Rally Phase
25. Victory Phase

This is a listing of the sequence in which a turn of The Battles
of Napoleon is played. The Command Control Phase is more fully
explained in section 9.0; the Recover/Operation Point Phase and
the Reinforcement Phase are detailed in section 10.0; the
Objective Phase is explained in section 5.0; the Leader Transfer
Phase is explained in section 9.12; the Operations Phase is
explained in section 6.0; and the Combat Phase is outlined in
section 7.0. The reason that some of the early phases are
explained later in the manual is that you need not know all of
the details about these phases in order to begin the game.

In the Mutual Operation Point Phase that occurs only on turn 1,
the computer simply assigns Operation Points to units, allowing
both sides to move and fire in their subsequent movement and
combat phases. The two other phases listed as only occurring
after turn 1 are not used on turn 1 because units are not going
to be in need of ammo resupply (see section 10.0) and units may
not come in as reinforcements on turn 1 (see section 10.2 and
15.0).


5.0 OBJECTIVE PHASE

Because of the sheer size of battles in the Napoleonic age, high
level commanders generally gave fairly vague instructions to
their subordinates, who in turn gave more detailed instructions
to their subordinates, and so on. In this game, however, you will
be able to play the parts of both the high level commanders and
their subordinates. You will give objectives to your Division
leaders which will tell them generally where you want them. This
is what the Objective Phase is all about, and represents the
orders given by the Army commander to the Corps or Division
commanders saying such things as, "Move your Division to that
hill over there and wait for further instructions."

The Movement Phase also enables you to have control over the
tactical level. In this phase, you can move individual battalions
and regiments to specific locations, thus giving you the ability
to play the role of both the Army commanders and the Brigade
commanders.

5.1 Objective Phase Information Area

Once in the Objective Phase, you will be presented with a
strategic view of the map. Below this map is an information area
which gives a summary of the options you have in this phase.
Certain letters are highlighted and show the keys to press to
select an option.

5.11 ACTIVE LEADER
The active leader and his current formation (brigade, division,
corps...) are shown in the top left of the information area. For
example, DIV: MORRAND shows that the active leader is Morrand,
and that he is a Division commander. The units in Morrand's
Division are highlighted on the screen.

5.111 Command Levels
The objective squares for infantry units are usually set at two
command levels (formation levels) above the lowest level of
infantry organization (individual infantry unit). If the
individual infantry units in your force are Battalions (as is
common), then the lowest level of your infantry organization is
the Battalion. This will result in objectives being set at the
Brigade or Division level.

The objective squares for cavalry units are set at one command
level above the lowest level of organization. Artillery units do
not get assigned objective squares.

5.12 OBJECTIVE SQUARE
Directly under the active leader listing is a display showing
where the current objective for the active leader's formation is.
For example, OBJECTIVE = 14,9 shows that the current objective
for the current formation, in this case Morrand's Division, is in
square 14,9. This location is given as an X,Y coordinate (see
section 5.121 for details) and is shown by a blinking cursor on
the map.

5.121 Coordinates
The X coordinates start at the left side of the map, where X is
0, and increase as they move right. The Y coordinates start at
the top of the map, where Y is 0, and increase as they move down.
The coordinates for the top left square on the map is 0,0. The
coordinates for the square that is both 10 squares down form the
top and 10 squares to the right of the left map edge are 9,9.
This is because the numbering begins with 0.

5.13 MOVING THE CURSOR
The bottom line shows the keys which may be used to move the
cursor. These numbers are illuminated. Movement is in the
direction indicated by the movement compass in the upper right
corner of the information display.

5.131 Movement Compass
To the right of the information area, numbers are arranged in one
of the following two patterns:
8 1 2               7 8 9
7 0 3               4 5 6
6 5 4               1 2 3
Standard       Keypad

Each of these is a movement compass. Pressing the keys for the
numbers on the outside of the compass causes the cursor (the
rectangle at center screen) to move in the direction that number
lies from the center of the compass.

5.14 NEXT LEADER
This option, selected by pressing the "N" key, allows you to
scroll through your available leaders, examining their current
objectives, and changing them if you so desire. If you continue
to select the "n" key, you will eventually find yourself back at
the beginning leader again. Note that as you press the "n" key,
and the leader changes, the highlighted units and the flashing
cursor will change locations, indicating the units and objective
of the newly selected leader.

5.15 CURSOR LOCATION
This X,Y display, located on the bottom of the Objective Phase
Information Area, shows the current location of the cursor in X,Y
coordinates. If you move the cursor, as outlined in 5.13 above,
this display will change with the movement.

5.2 Objective Selection

In all scenarios, formations will start the game with their
objectives already selected. You may change these objectives as
desired in the first Objective Phase without penalty. However,
changing objectives in later Objective Phases will result in the
penalties outlined in section 5.41.

5.3 Objective Effects
A unit's movement is restricted by its objective. When a unit is
being moved, the information area for that unit will show a
number in parentheses next to its direction of facing (DIR). That
number is the direction in which that unit should move in order
to bring it closer to its objective.

5.31 MOVEMENT PENALTIES
Units which move in the direction shown in parentheses (or within
1 of that direction) suffer no movement penalty. Units which move
in any other movement direction are penalized based on how far
away their movement direction is from the direction in
parentheses. All penalties are in movement points, also known as
Operations Points, which are explained more fully in section
6.31.

The amount by which a unit is penalized is based on the following
example:

A unit's objective is in direction 3 on a standard movement
compass. If the unit was to move in directions 2, 3, or 4, there
would be no movement penalties. However, if the unit moved in
either direction 1 or direction 5, there would be a one movement
point penalty for moving in that direction. If the unit was to
move in direction 8 or 6, there would be a 2 point movement
penalty. There is a 3 point movement penalty for moving in a
direction opposite to that of your objective. Note that this
penalty is per square entered.

Units within 5 squares of their objective square my move in any
direction without penalty.

5.4 Changing Objectives

A formation's objective may be changed during the Objective
Phase. To change an active leader's formation's objective, move
the cursor over the square you want to be the new objective, and
press the "O" key. The new objective square is set, and the game
proceeds to the next leader.

5.41 CHANGE PENALTIES
When a new objective is selected for an organization, the
Operation Points (see section 6.31) for all units in that
organization are halved during the following Movement Phase.
These units will also lose 2 to 4 levels of Readiness depending
on the leader's rating (see section 9.1) and a random factor. The
only exception to this is during a player's first Objective
Phase. During the first objective phase of the game, a player may
change objectives without these penalties being assessed.

5.5 Exiting the Objective Phase

To exit the Objective Phase you simply press the "E" key. As
there is no fail-safe question, once you press this key you are
out of the Objective Phase and into the Operations Phase. This
important because in the first Objective Phase of the game, the
penalties listed above do not apply. Therefore, press the "E" key
only when you are sure you are through with this phase.


6.0 OPERATIONS PHASE

The Operation Phase is where you examine the map, move all of
your units, give them order, and alter their formations. It is
where all of the game decisions are made and is the heart of The
Battles of Napoleon. Once you understand this phase, you
understand how to play the game.

Cursor Menu

When you enter the Operations Phase, you are placed in Cursor
Mode. This is where the Cursor Menu is displayed at the bottom of
the screen and you are able to move the cursor about the map.
Several important functions are available in this mode.

6.01 CURSOR MENU COMMAND SUMMARY
(SEE BACK COVER)

6.02 PLAYER PHASE
The first and second lines in the Cursor Menu list several
important bits of information. They list the date and time of the
battle, the phase number, and which payer's phase it is. The
player and phase information assists in keeping track of where in
the sequence of play you are. The date of battle is just for
reference, but the time of day is important in figuring out how
many turns are left in the game. For the historical scenarios,
the hour of the first and last turns are listed in section 13.0.

6.03 CURSOR MOVEMENT
On the second line of the Cursor Menu the keys are shown which
will move the cursor about the map. They correspond to the
movement compass shown on the right of the Menu. See section 5.13
for more details.

6.04 ACCESSING A UNIT WITH THE SPACE BAR
The listing SPACE is there to remind you that if you move the
cursor over a unit and press the space bar, the unit will be
accessed and you will go from the Cursor Menu to the Command Menu
(see section 6.31). A unit must be accessed in order to give it
orders.

6.05 VIEW AND LOS
The "V" key is enabled to allow you to view the Line of Sight
(LOS) from the square the cursor occupies. When this option is
chosen, you are prompted to choose a direction. This direction is
the compass direction you wish to examine for the LOS. After
selecting a direction, a portion of the map will be highlighted.
The squares that are highlighted are the squares that can be seen
from the cursor-occupied square, in the direction you indicated.
LOS is blocked by certain types of terrain.

6.06 SEEING UNDER UNITS
The "T" key can be pressed to remove all units from the map so
that you can see the terrain underneath.

6.07 TERRAIN TYPE AND ELEVATION
On the bottom of the Cursor Menu is a listing showing the type of
terrain that is in the square that the cursor is over, and the
level of elevation that this terrain is at. An example would be
CLEAR (3). This would indicate that the cursor is in a clear
terrain square and is at level 3 elevation. See the Terrain
Effects Chart in the back of this rulebook for more details on
the effects of terrain and elevation.

6.08 CURSOR LOCATION
The X,Y listing on the bottom of the Cursor Menu tells where the
cursor is at any given moment. This is using the standard
coordinate system, listed in section 5.121.

6.09 CHANGING MAPS
Pressing the "O" key will change the map from the tactical scale
to the strategic scale shown during the Objective Phase. This
"zoom out" map is useful in getting an overall picture of the
battle. However, since everything on the strategic map is
smaller, much of the details is lost and it is suggested that
players use the tactical map to give their orders. The "O" key
will also switch the scale back if pressed again.

6.10 ENTERING THE COMBAT PHASE
Pressing the "C" key will cause you to exit the Operations Phase
and enter the Combat Phase. This key does have a verification
prompt, so if you press it by accident, you will be able to stay
in the Operations Phase.

6.11 VICTORY SQUARE HIGHLIGHTING
Pressing the "W" key will highlight all of the victory squares
for each side.

6.2 Command Menu

This menu appears when a unit is selected by using the Space Bar
in the Cursor Menu while the cursor is over a friendly unit. The
Command Menu permits you to move units and to give them orders
for combat. Generally, a unit must be accessed before you may
move or give orders to it.

COMMAND MENU COMMAND SUMMARY
This is simply a summary of all of the commands available from
the Command Menu. Although not all of them have been explained in
this section, the brief description below will tell you where to
find more detailed information on the command. They are listed
here for convenience:

(0) - This command centers the map on the unit (the command is
"5" if using the alternate keypad).

(1-8) - moves the unit in the desired direction as indicated by
the movement compass at the bottom right of the screen ("1-9" for
alternate keypad users).

(A)dvance sets the unit to advance into a square vacated by the
retreat of enemy unit(s) in front of the advancing unit. To be
eligible to advance, that friendly unit's fire or melee combat
must have caused the enemy unit to retreat. As this is a toggle,
if the ADV: flag is already set to Y, pressing the "A" key again
will set it back to N (see section 6.42).

(D)irection permits you to change the facing of the accessed unit
(see section 6.36).

(F)ire calls up the Fire Menu which permits the giving of fire
commands (see section 6.41).

(G) changes the cavalry auto-retreat toggle (see section 6.434).
For infantry units and artillery units, it changes the unit's
Road Mode status from Normal to Road (see section 6.351).

(H) Increases the number of skirmishers out by 25% of the total
skirmishers in the unit until 100% is reached. Once 100% are out,
pressing the "H" key again resets the % out to 0% (see section
6.354).

(I)nverse allows the accessing of a higher level of organization
to give certain fire orders to all units of that formation. A sub
menu allowing you to select NO PLOT or NO FIRE orders for the
entire organization. Units accessed may be from regiment through
army (see section 6.41).

(J) highlights the accessed unit's objective square (refer to
section 5.0).

(K) orders skirmishers out of the unit. If the skirmishers are
already out, they are then ordered back in by this command. This
also causes the SKRM number on the Infantry Command Menu to be
highlighted.

(M)elee plots the unit to melee any enemy units in the square
that the unit faces. If the unit is already under orders to
melee, pressing this key will order the unit NOT to melee (see
section 6.42).

(N)ext accesses the next friendly unit in the Order of Battle
(see section 12.1).

(Q)uit exits from the unit to the Cursor Menu (see section 6.1).

(R) switches the unit between frontline status and non-frontline
status (see section 6.341).

(S)elect formation allows you to change formation for the unit in
question. The types of formation available to the unit will be
automatically listed and offered to you (see section 6.35).

(SPACE BAR) switches between the Command Menu pages for the
currently accessed unit. This is a toggle so hitting the SPACE
BAR again will return you to the 1st page of the Command Menu
(see section 6.32).

(T)errain removes the unit shapes from the map allowing you to
examine the terrain underneath.

(U)nder allows you to access the next unit in the square. If
selected when there is only one unit in a square, there will be
no response.

(V)iew highlights all squares that the currently accessed unit
can see and fire at with its weapons (see section 6.41).

(W) highlights all victory squares on the map, first for one side
and then for the other.

(X) force marches the unit, adding 1 OP point at a cost of adding
6 Fatigue points.

(Z) aborts all of the orders given to the currently accessed unit
since its most recent access. If you (Q)uit a unit and then pick
it back up, you may not abort any previously given orders (see
section 6.32).

6.21 COMMAND MENU INFORMATION AREA
6.211 Infantry Information Area
Here is a sample Infantry Information Area:

FR 1/12/3 LN   INF BATT. DIR:3(3)            8 1 2
340 MEN   0 SKRM    AM:7 FL:N MUS            7 0 3
OP:11     FT:0 EFF:60    ADV:N     MEL:N     6 5 4
RIDGE (2) X,Y:6, 10 NO PLOT

Note that unlike previous menus, this information area does not
provide a summary of the commands which can be given from the
menu. The following information is provided:

6.212 Information Area Description Unit Name
FR 1/12/3 LN: This unit is French (FR). It is the first battalion
of the 12th regiment of the 3rd division (1/12/3). It is a line
unit (LN) as opposed to a light (LT) unit.

Unit Organization
INF BATT.: This unit is an infantry Battalion (INF BATT.).

Facing and Objective Direction
DIR:3 (3): This unit is facing in direction (DIR) 3. The
straightest path to its objective square is to move in direction
(3).

Number of Men
340 MEN: This unit contains 340 men.

Number of Skirmisher
0 SKRM: This unit contains no men which can skirmish. Note that
this area will be inverted if skirmishers are currently deployed.
(See section 6.354 for a description of skirmishers.)

Ammunition Status
AM:7: This unit has enough ammunition for 7 shots. Ammunition is
replenished in the Replenishment Phase (see section 10.1).

Front Line Status
FL:N: This unit is not (N) a front line unit. Front line units
are the only ones which suffer casualties from fire combat (see
section 6.341).

Armament
MUS: This unit is armed with muskets (see table in section 20.5).

Number of Operation Points
OP:11: This unit has 11 Operation Points (see section 6.31).

Fatigue Level
FT:0: This unit has no Fatigue (see section 8.1).

Efficiency Level
EFF:60: This unit has a current efficiency level of 60 (see
section 8.3).

Advance Status
ADV:N: This unit is not (N) currently set to advance after combat
(see section 6.42).

Melee Status
MEL:N: This unit is not (N) ordered to melee the square directly
ahead of it (see section 6.42).

Type and Elevation of Occupied Terrain
RIDGE (2): This unit occupies a ridge square which has an
elevation of 2 (see section 6.38).

Unit location X,Y:6,10: This unit occupies the square with X
coordinate 6 and Y coordinate 10.

Fire Plot
NO PLOT: This unit is not plotted to fire. In the event that a
valid target becomes available, the computer will plot the unit's
fire (see section 6.41).

Artillery Information Area
The display for artillery units is very similar to that of the
infantry unit described above. The only differences are in the
lack of skirmishers (artillery may not put out skirmishers), in
the addition of a display showing the number of guns remaining,
and in the deletion of the objective direction. The objective
information is deleted because artillery units are not subject to
the same objective penalties as are infantry units.

Cavalry Information Area
The display for cavalry units is identical to that of infantry
units. Note that in general, cavalry units will have more OP
points than infantry and will usually be armed with only SBR
(sabre) as opposed to MUS (musket). In addition, cavalry never
have skirmishers.

6.22 COMMAND MENU SECOND PAGE
The space bar allows you to switch between the information area
described above and a more detailed summary of a unit's status.
Pressing the SPACE BAR after accessing FR 1/12/3 LN brings up the
following screen:

6.221 Infantry Command Menu Second Page

FR 1/12/3                     #20  X,Y:6,10
REG: COURTIER                 5    X,Y:6,10  (0)
DIV:AULARD                    6    X,Y:7,12  (2)
CORPS:EUGENE                  12   X,Y:5,9   (1)
ARMY:NAPOLEON            15   NOT ON MAP
OBJECTIVE: 14, 10 (3)         READINESS: 5
MEN: 340                      FRONTLINE: NO
SKIRMISHERS: 0                (IN) (0%)
OPERATION POINTS: 11          FACING: 3
COMMAND CONTROL: 24           AMMO: 7
DISRUPTION LEVEL: 0           MORALE: 60
EFFICIENCY: 60 (68)           FATIGUE: 0
MELEE FACTOR: 4               MELEE: NO
FORMATION: COL                ROAD MODE: NORMAL
WEAPON: MUS                   NO PLOT
ADVANCE: NO                   LEADER: COURTIER

The first section (the first five lines) gives a summary of the
command hierarchy for the unit. The first line gives the unit's
name (FR 1/12/3), its unit # (20 - note that unit # is primarily
for usage with the Editor), and the X, Y location that the unit
currently occupies (6,10). The second line gives the next level
of organization to which the unit belongs to (REG or regiment),
the regimental commander's name (Courtier), Courtier's leadership
bonus (5), the X, Y location that the regimental commander
occupies currently (6,10), and the distance in squares to that
leader (0). This information is then repeated for each of the
next lines, until the Army commander is reached. This display may
be less than five lines if the lowest level of organization is
higher than battalion (as is the case in the Borodino and
Waterloo scenarios).

The next three sections (lines 6 through 17) give specific
information about the unit. Although each item is explained in
detail in the appropriate section, here is a brief summary:

OBJECTIVE: 14, 10 (3): indicates that the objective for the unit
is in square 14,10 and that objective is in direction (3) from
the unit.

READINESS: 5: displays the unit's Readiness level (see section
8.4). This number ranges from 0 to 7, with a higher number being
better.

MEN: 340: shows how many men are left in the unit (minus
casualties suffered this far into the game). Obviously, this
number will tend to go down as the game goes on.

FRONTLINE: NO: indicates that this unit is not a frontline unit
(see section 6.341).

SKIRMISHERS: 0: shows that this unit has no skirmisher. This will
prevent it from putting skirmishers "out" (see section 6.35).

(IN) (0%): In this case the first bracketed part tells us whether
or not our skirmishers are deployed (see section 6.354), in which
case this would read (OUT). The second part tells us the
percentage of skirmishers out, in 25% increments.

OPERATION POINTS: 11: The unit has 11 operation points remaining
(see 6.31).

FACING: 3: The unit is facing in direction 3.

COMMAND CONTROL: 24: The unit's command control number (see
section 9.0 for details).

AMMO: 7: The unit has 7 shots of ammunition left.

DISRUPTION LEVEL: 0: The unit has no Disruption. Disruption may
be anywhere from level 0 to level 5 (see section 8.5).

MORALE: 60: The unit's Morale is 60 (see section 8.2).

EFFICIENCY: 60 (68): The unit is currently at an efficiency of 60
out of a possible maximum of 68 for this unit. Given time to rest
and recuperate, this unit will eventually go back to an
efficiency of 68. Section 8.3 describes efficiency more
thoroughly.

FATIGUE:0 : The unit is fully rested. As the unit performs
actions, Fatigue will go up as the unit tires. Fatigue goes down
when the unit is allowed to rest (see section 8.1).

MELEE FACTOR: 4: The relative melee ability of the unit. This
scale goes from 1 to 9, with 1 being the lowest and 9 being the
highest. As a general rule, the highest is 5, with higher values
only being found on cavalry. Melee factor is explained in section
7.3 and in section 15.

MELEE: NO: The unit's melee flag is set to NO. This unit will not
attempt to melee this units directly in front of it. If this flag
is set to YES, the unit will try to melee the unit directly in
front of it.

FORMATION: COL: The unit is in column mode. The other modes are
explained under section 8.3

ROAD MODE: NORMAL: The unit is not in Road Mode. If this unit was
in Road Mode, this display would read ROAD.

WEAPON: MUS: The unit is equipped with Muskets. The complete list
of weapons can be found in the Weapons Table (see table in
section 20.5).

NO PLOT: The unit has no fire plot. This means that the unit will
not fire unless an enemy unit comes within range and arc of fire.
See section 6.41 for more details.

ADVANCE: NO: The unit is not plotted to advance after combat. If
this flag is set to YES, the unit would advance into the square
directly ahead of it, if left vacant by a retreating enemy unit,
after the combat phase.

LEADER: COURTIER: The unit has an attached leader, in this case
COURTIER is his name. His position is indicated at the top of
this page of information.

6.222 Artillery Command Second Page
This display is very similar to the Infantry Command Second Page,
with a few exceptions. The main difference is in the lack of
leader information at the top, due to the fact that artillery
generally don't go into the normal command structure. In
addition, the skirmisher information is missing because artillery
cannot skirmish. Also missing are the Melee and Advance flags,
because artillery may not do either voluntarily.

6.223 Cavalry Command Second Page
Again, this display is similar to that of the infantry, with the
addition of a listing for whether or not the unit's CAV RETREAT
flag is set to yes or no. This listing is added where the ROAD
MODE listing used to be, as cavalry units my not enter road mode.

6.3 Movement Orders

Once a unit has been selected it may be moved using the movement
keys (1-8 or 1-9, depending on the compass you chose). A unit's
movement is restricted by a number of factors which includes
terrain, the presence of enemy units, the formation the unit is
in, the unit's objective, and the number of operation points it
has.

6.31 OPERATION POINTS
Operation Points (OP points) represent, in effect, the speed at
which a given unit can act. The more OP points a unit has, the
more it can do. OP points are expended whenever a unit moves,
fires, changes formation, changes facing, melees, or any of a
number of other actions. The number of OP points that a unit
receives is varied according to its Command Control (see section
9.0) and its Operation Point Modifier (see section 15.0).
Generally, the number of OP points a unit will receive is between
8 and 15 OP points, although this can vary with the nationality
of the unit (see section 15.0). OP points are received at the
conclusion of each combat phase.

6.32 MOVING A UNIT
Units are moved by accessing them (place the cursor over them and
hit the SPACE BAR) and then moving them in the desired direction
through use of the movement compass. Movement expends OP points
as per the Operation Costs Table (see section 20.15). Units may
always move one square, at the cost of all remaining OP points
(exception see section 6.33).

Units may not enter certain types of terrain (as specified in the
Operation Costs Table) and may not enter a square containing an
enemy unit. Just moving next to enemy units incurs additional OP
points costs, as specified in section 6.33.

Involuntary movement of units may occur in other phases than the
movement phase, such as advances after combat in the combat
phase. The involuntary movements costs the unit no OP points.

If, during movement of a unit, you decide that you have changed
your mind and would like to take back the move you are making,
then press the "Z" key and the move will be aborted. Units that
cause hidden units to appear and then have their move aborted
with the "Z" key will be charged 4 OP points for their
"reconnaissance".

Units may be restricted in their moves depending on the formation
they are in. These restrictions are summarized in the Operation
Costs Table (see section 20.15). They are also explained under
section 6.35, Formations.

Note specifically that movement may involve costs of Fatigue as
well as OP points. Fatigue reduces the Morale of a unit and
therefore moving units without rest for long distances can cause
them to become tired and less powerful as fighting forces.

6.33 ZONES OF CONTROL
The eight squares surrounding each unit constitute its zone of
control (ZOC). ZOCs affect movement costs as per the Operation
Costs Table. In addition to the extra OP point costs for entering
or leaving an enemy ZOC, units will suffer additional losses when
forced to retreat into an enemy ZOC. This also applies to units
that rout in an enemy ZOC.

Movement of a friendly unit from one square of an enemy ZOC to
another square of an enemy ZOC is not permitted, even if the
friendly unit is only to move one square, unless the square that
unit is moving into is already occupied by a friendly unit. There
are various recovery penalties associated with being in an enemy
ZOC (see section 8.0).

6.34 STACKING
There are a number of restriction to the number of men that may
occupy a given square at a given time. This limit is 1800
infantrymen or 1200 cavalrymen in a single square. These men may
be of different units, so the limitation is not on the number of
units but purely on the number of men. The number of men limit is
halved when the square in question is a woods or town square.
Artillery units count as a number of men equal to 50 times the
number of guns in the unit. Therefore, an artillery unit with 6
guns counts as 300 infantrymen/cavalrymen for stacking purposes.

Units may temporarily overstack during the movement of a given
unit, but the unit being moved may not end its move overstacked.
If it attempts to, a message will appear informing you that the
only available option is to continue movement or to abort the
move.

Cavalry may not stack with infantry. Artillery may stack with
either infantry or cavalry.

During normal movement, routed units may not stack with another
unit. A routed unit may only stack with another unit during the
retreat movement.

6.341 Frontline Status
Frontline status represents the fact that only one infantry unit
may actually occupy the "front" of a square while other units may
be behind the front unit but still in the square. This is
represented by the unit's frontline status. Frontline status is a
toggle that is changed by pressing the "R" key. Only one infantry
unit in a square my be the "frontline" unit and have its FL:
toggle read Y. All other units are automatically FL:N (see the
Command Menu Information Area description in section 6.212). The
non-frontline units in a square may contribute to melee combat,
but may not fire. If several units in a square have their FL
toggle read Y when you return to the Cursor Menu, all but the
first unit in a square will have their toggle change to N. If no
units in a square have their toggle set to Y, when you return to
the Cursor Menu, the first unit will have its toggle set to Y.

Cavalry units are special in regards to the fact that multiple
cavalry units within a square may have their frontline toggle set
to Y.

All artillery units within a square may be frontline. This is in
addition to the one infantry unit. Thus, one infantry unit AND
any cavalry units may be frontline within a given square.

Units that are non-frontline may not fire during the fire phases.

6.35 FORMATIONS
Formations represent the way that the infantry, cavalry, or
artillery unit is deployed within a square. Different formations
have different effects and are a very important part of the game.
You change the formation of units during the Operation Phase by
pressing the "S" key. A list of the available formations will
then appear at the bottom of the information area and allow you
to select the desire formation. if the same formation that the
unit is currently in is selected again, the unit will simply
ignore the command and no OP points cost will be assessed. When a
unit changes formation, it pays a cost as per the Operation Costs
Table (see section 20.15). Note that the different formations
have different graphic shapes to represent them.

6.351 Infantry Formation
Infantry can adopt four formations and one mode, each with its
own effects, strengths, and weaknesses. They are:

Line Formation: This gives infantry its greatest firepower with
reduced movement. Line is the formation to use to bring fire on
an enemy.

Column Formation: This formation allows much greater mobility
than line formation because the infantry is marching in a tight,
easily controlled column. Units in column are very powerful in
melee but suffer higher casualties from fire and are less
powerful in fire combat.

Square Formation: Square was a formation developed specifically
to protect units from cavalry melee attacks. Units in square have
no mobility and may see in all directions. They cannot be flanked
and suffer greatly from fire combat. They are vulnerable, in
fact, to virtually everything but melee attacks. However, they
are very resistant to cavalry changes. Units will spontaneously
attempt to form square when charged by cavalry.

Open Formation: This represents a "spread-out" formation that
permits units to move through and deploy in woods and towns.
Units in open formation suffer greatly from melee attacks but are
the most resistant to fire combat. However, they are incapable of
powerful return fire. This is primarily a defensive formation
used when approaching an enemy while under heavy fire.

Road Mode: This is a special type of formation that is not
reached with the "S" key. A unit may only enter or leave road
mode at the beginning of its movement phase. To enter or leave
road mode, press the "G" key. An infantry unit may only enter
road mode if it is not within four squares of an enemy unit. Road
mode allows a unit to move very swiftly using roads. However,
units in road mode are VERY vulnerable to fire combat. They are
automatically treated as if they are in column formation and take
DOUBLE casualties from fire combat.

6.352 Artillery Formations
Artillery can also adopt one of three different formations. They
are:

Limbered Formation: This is the formation that artillery units
must adopt in order to move. An artillery unit in limbered
formation may not fire.

Unlimbered Formation: This is the opposite of limbered formation,
and when an artillery unit is unlimbered, it may fire but may not
move. Unlimbered artillery may change facing (see section 6.36)
and are therefore not required to limber, turn, and then
unlimber.

Open Formation: This formation is much like the infantry
counterpart. It is the same as unlimbered, except that the guns
are deployed in a "spread-out" fashion. This is required if the
unit is to deploy in woods or town, and will cause the unit to
inflict fewer casualties (however, the unit will suffer fewer as
well).

Note specifically that artillery units can also adopt "road mode"
as described above, with similar results and effects.

6.353 Cavalry Formations
Cavalry units also have five different formations they can adopt:

Charge Formation: This formation permits the cavalry to execute a
charge. It is a special formation that combines movement and
melee into a single action. When a cavalry unit adopts charge
formation, it is immediately prompted to select a target square
for the charge. The menu that is presented is much like the fire
menu (see section 6.41) and allows you to view the area which you
may target, to select a target square, or to exit the menu. Units
in charge formation may not move, except during the cavalry
charge sub-phase of the combat phase, at which time they will
move automatically. See section 6.43 for more details on charges.

Counter-charge Formation: This formation is identical to charge
formation in that after a cavalry unit adopts it, it may not move
until it changes back to normal, open, or dismounted formation.
Once you place a unit into  counter-charge formation, it will
wait until an enemy cavalry unit in the midst of a charge comes
within 6 squares and in LOS of your counter-charger. At that
point, your unit will have to pass a charge test (see section
6.43) and, upon passing it, you will be prompted as to whether
you would like your unit in counter-charge. If you answer yes,
your unit will charge towards the charging enemy cavalry. This
charge operates in the same way as a normal charge, right down to
having your counter-charging cavalry unit forcing enemy infantry
units to form square or retreat (See section 6.43).

Normal Formation: This represents the normal movement mode of
cavalry. The only cavalry units that may fire while mounted are
units armed with carbines (CRB) (see 20.5). These units fire
under normal fire rules (see 7.3) and may only fire while in
Normal or Open formation.

Open Formation: Open formation permits cavalry to move though
woods and towns and represents the unit being spread-out over the
square. Units in open formation are less powerful in melee combat
but are more resistant to fire combat. The only cavalry units
that may fire while mounted are units armed with carbines (CRB)
(see 20.5). These units fire under normal fire rules (see 7.3)
and may only fire while in Normal or Open formation.

Dismounted Formation: This formation will only be offered to
cavalry that is armed with other than sabres (see chart 20.5),
allowing them to dismount and fight as infantry. Only units so
armed may dismount. Once a unit dismounts, it is treated just
like an infantry unit in line formation. Note that dismounted
cavalry may not form square or column, nor may they enter road
mode.

6.354 Skirmishers
Skirmishers were troops that would operate ahead of infantry
units, screening the main units from enemy fire. They were light
troops that operated in a sort of loose line and attempted to
engage enemy units with harassing fire. Of course, the more
skirmishers that there were, the more dangerous was this
"harassing fire." The main purpose of this fire was to cause
confusion in the enemy ranks as the enemy tried to deploy into a
combat formation. The only effective counter for these groups of
light troops is skirmishers to engage the skirmishers.

In game terms, skirmishers, when deployed, reduce the casualties
suffered by an advancing formation. They also provide very
effective fire against an enemy unit. They are deployed by
pressing the "K" key with a unit selected. This will also toggle
the Skirmishers IN/OUT flag on the Infantry Command Menu Second
Page (see section 6.221 above). This action costs 1 OP point and
cannot be accomplished if the unit in question has no skirmishers
or is in an enemy ZOC. Skirmishers that are deployed come from
the unit, they are not extra men (see the example below). Once
skirmishers are deployed, the % OUT flag can be changed, in
increments of 25%, by pressing the "H" key. This % represents the
percentage deployed of the maximum number of skirmishers the unit
could deploy. Example: A French infantry unit with 600 men is
listed as having 100 skirmishers. This means that the unit has a
total of 600 men, of which 100 can skirmish. If the unit deploys
50% skirmishers out, that means that there are 50 skirmishers
deployed and 550 men in the main unit.

Skirmishers are very vulnerable to melee, and will therefore
automatically recombine back into the main unit in the event of
melee combat. In addition, any unit that is comprised completely
of skirmish infantry (i.e., a unit that has an equal number of
men to skirmishers and has 100% skirmishers OUT) will
automatically retreat if charged by cavalry (see section 6.4) or
if they are not deployed in woods, town, or redoubt terrain and
they are meleed by enemy infantry.

All casualties taken in fire combat by a unit with skirmishers
deployed will be taken most by the skirmishers. This means that
skirmishers, although very resistant to enemy fire, will wear out
quickly. Units that are victims of a cavalry charge that do not
retreat or form square will take heavy casualties to their
skirmishers.

As a general rule, the only reason to operate a line infantry
unit (one with only a portion of its men capable of skirmishing)
with only 25,50, or 75% skirmishers out is to save some of them
for later in the battle. Once a unit loses its skirmishers, it
will be much more vulnerable to fire combat, especially from
enemy units with skirmishers.

Following any combat phase, all units currently in an enemy ZOC
will pull all of their skirmishers back in and will have their
skirmisher out flag reset to N. The only exception to this is a
unit in woods, town, or swamp.

6.36 FACING
Every unit has a specific facing that indicates the direction the
men in the unit are pointed. Infantry units in square formation
have no specific facing, as they face in all directions. They can
see in all directions and cannot be attacked in the flank. All
other formations have a specific direction in which they face and
can "see". Facing can be changed by pressing the "D" from the
Command Menu. Changing facing costs 1 OP point.

All units with a specific facing can "see" in a 90ø angle. This
angle extends from the center of a unit's square in the direction
it is facing and determines a unit's Line of Sight (LOS). LOS
controls what squares a unit may shoot at and is affected by
facing, terrain, and the presence of units (fiendly or enemy).

Facing also affects combat. It a unit is attacked from a square
that is not in its front 90ø angle of fire, it is being attacked
in a flank. A unit that is flanked will suffer additional
casualties in fire and melee combat. In addition, units may not
fire from their flanks. Units in a redoubt cannot be flanked.

All units in a square must have the same facing. Because of this,
when a unit is selected out of a stack of units and its facing is
changed, all units in the stack are turned as well. Only the
selected unit must pay the OP point cost for turning.

6.37 FORCED MARCHING
This is an option that allows you to increase the number of OP
points available to a unit. You may force march a unit by
pressing the "X" key. This increases the number of OP points
available to the unit at a cost of 6 Fatigue per extra OP point.
Extremely tired units and routed units may not use forced march.
In addition, units may not use this option they have more than 40
Fatigue. Units may gain a Disruption level from using force march
(see 8.5).

6.38 TERRAIN
Virtually every facet of the game is affected in some way by
terrain. Terrain can block LOS, give combat benefits to units
occupying certain types of terrain, and will vary the number of
OP points required to move a unit. See the tables in section 20
for further information on terrain effects.

6.4 Fire and Melee Orders

The object of the game is to cause casualties to enemy units to
force them to run away, allowing your forces to hold certain map
objectives. Casualties are caused by one of two methods: firing
at enemy units with your units and meleeing enemy units with your
units. Because of the level of detail shown in this game, you are
able to give individual orders to your units, telling them which
enemy units to shoot at and which ones to melee. You may even
tell your units not to fire until the enemy is at point blank
range. However, you are not forced to do this. If you give your
units no orders at all, they will fire at targets that they
themselves choose, assuming that they have the OP points
required. Units must have 1 OP point remaining at the end of the
Operation Phase to be able to fire. They must have an additional
2 OP points remaining if they wish to melee as well. Note that
artillery must have 4 OP points to fire.

In order to give specific fire orders to a friendly unit, press
the "F" key while in the Command Menu and the Fire Menu will
appear.

Artillery units that are ordered to fire at a specific target may
retarget to a different target if there is a closer one
available. This is to simulate that artillery commanders would
usually fire at advancing enemy troops that are close before they
would even consider long-range bombardment. Artillery units will
also not fire at long range unless specifically ordered to do so
(with fire orders).

6.41 FIRE MENU
When in the Fire Menu, several options will be available:

(V) = Allows you to illuminate all square within the LOS and
firing range of the unit and its weapons. This is useful for
figuring out which enemy units can be seen by the unit and which
squares the unit cannot see because of terrain or other
restrictions.

(T) = Gives a specific target to a unit. If the targeted unit is
not in your unit's LOS, you will get a message to that effect.
When this key is pressed over a legitimate target square, the
unit will change its fire plot on the Command Menu Information
Area to read the X,Y coordinates of the square you just selected.
Note that it is possible to target a square that is currently
empty in order to cover a specific location. If, in the enemy's
subsequent Operation Phase, the enemy moves a unit into that
square, it will automatically be targeted by your unit.

(E) = Returns you to the Command Menu with a NO PLOT reading in
your fire section of the Command Menu Information Area.

(N) = Used to order your unit to hold its fire until the last
possible moment. It is primarily used to prevent your units from
firing, and thus tiring themselves and expending ammunition,
until an enemy unit is adjacent to your unit. Selecting this
option will put a NO FIRE reading in the unit's fire section. You
cannot prevent a unit with ammunition from firing in its own
defense if an enemy unit is adjacent to your unit. Therefore, the
NO FIRE option will be ignored if a unit has an enemy target
adjacent to it.

6.42 MELEE AND ADVANCE TOGGLES
Units can set the melee flag to Y by pressing the "m" key from
the Command Menu. This orders the unit to melee any enemy units
in the square directly in front of it during the combat phase.
Changing the toggle costs no OP points, but the unit must have 1
OP point available after fire combat in order to initiate a
melee. See section 7.3 for more information on melee combat and
its effects. Pressing the "M" key again will change the melee
toggle back to off.

The advance flag is also a toggle and can be changed to "Y" by
pressing the "A" key from the Command Menu. This orders the unit
to advance into the square directly in front of it, if its
vacant, after the combat phase. It costs the unit no OP points or
Fatigue to advance after combat. A second press of the "A" key
will change the advance flag back to N.

6.43 CAVALRY CHARGES
Cavalry charges are a special attack form that combine movement
and melee. In order for a cavalry unit to execute a charge, it
must be in charge mode, must have selected a target, and must
pass a charge test (see section 6.435). In addition, the cavalry
unit must have a Disruption level of 3 or less (see section 8.5),
must have at least 6 OP points remaining after entering charge
formation, and must have a Morale of at least 25 (see section
8.2).

A cavalry charge is initiated by changing the cavalry unit's
formation to charge formation. You will then be presented with a
charge menu. Selecting the "V" key will inverse all of the
squares that the cavalry unit could charge. Note that a cavalry
unit does not need to see the square it is charging in order to
charge it. Once in this menu, you move the cursor, using the
movement compass, and then press the "T" key over the square that
you wish for the cavalry unit to charge. This will initiate a
cavalry charge against that square. You don't actually give
cavalry orders to charge a specific unit, just specific squares.
The cavalry unit will then melee the first unit it contacts on
its way to the square you targeted. If it reaches the square
without hitting any enemy troops, it will stop.

Cavalry that pass their charge test will charge directly towards
their selected target square moving in as straight a line as
possible while avoiding movement through any friendly infantry or
artillery units.

When a charging cavalry unit enters an enemy ZOC, it will stop.
At this time, a number of checks are performed. The cavalry unit
may do a number of things including overrunning the unit it has
just contacted, causing casualties to both the target unit and
the cavalry unit and forcing the enemy unit to retreat. If this
happens, the cavalry unit will gain 4 Fatigue and a Disruption
level and then may proceed with its charge, possibly on to
another unit. Another possible charge contact result is that the
enemy unit may stand and the cavalry unit will attempt to melee
the enemy unit rather than running through it to contact another
unit. If this happens, the charge will stop and melee will occur
in the melee phase.

Cavalry units gain 2 Fatigue for each square entered during a
charge. This is in addition to any Fatigue gained for overrunning
or meleeing enemy units.

Cavalry may not melee units that are in town, woods, redoubt, or
sunken road. If they move adjacent to a unit in such terrain
during a charge, the cavalry unit will stop and will not be able
to melee that unit. In addition, units in such terrain are not
forced to check for forming square in the face of a cavalry
charge.

6.431 Counter-Charges
Cavalry which is set to counter-charge will move to engage any
charging enemy cavalry within 6 squares that is within its LOS.
Counter-charging cavalry units must pass the same charge test as
charging cavalry and will suffer the same charge penalties and
benefits as do normal charging cavalry.

6.432 Infantry Charge Reaction Tests
Infantry, when faced with charging cavalry units, would generally
try to change to the square formation, or "form square" as it was
called. The infantry units will make a "square test" whenever any
charging enemy cavalry comes within 2 squares (one square if the
infantry unit has an enemy unit adjacent to it) of the infantry
unit. There are tree possible results of this test.

The first possibility is that the unit will form square and stand
to receive the cavalry charge. Cavalry generally fare poorly when
attacking a square and will almost never succeed in seriously
hurting the infantry in square. This is, after all, why the
infantry try to form square.

Another possibility is that the infantry unit will stand, in
whatever formation they are currently in, to receive the charge.
This is less desirable, but infinitely better than the third
result.

The last possible reaction is one of utter panic. The infantry
unit may, if it feels that it can't form square in time, simply
flee from the cavalry. The unit will the retreat two squares,
gain several levels of Disruption, and generally try to avoid the
charging cavalry. They may also not test again that turn, which
means that if the cavalry charge carries into them, they will
automatically get overrun, usually resulting in a rout.

Infantry that is already in square formation or in certain
terrain types (see section 6.43) is exempted from this reaction
test. In addition, infantry composed entirely of skirmishers or
units in open order will automatically flee from the charging
cavalry.

6.433 Advancing Cavalry
Cavalry that ends its charge next to an enemy unit will try to
melee that unit. If, in its melee, it forces the unit to retreat,
it may elect to advance after combat. British cavalry that wins a
melee will ALWAYS advance into the now vacant square. Non-British
cavalry have a 20% chance of advancing after winning a melee.
Cavalry that fails to win a melee or fails to advance after
winning a melee will retreat from 3 to 5 squares and will change
to open formation. In addition to the above retreat, cavalry that
fails to advance will change its cavalry Auto-Retreat Toggle to
"yes" (see 6.434).

6.434 Cavalry Auto-Retreat Toggle
Cavalry may be ordered to retreat before melee or if fired upon
by enemy units. This is done by selecting the "G" key from the
Command Menu. Cavalry so ordered my still charge, but will not
melee any enemy units. They will simply charge to create
confusion before retreating again. This represents a harassing
attack. They will also retreat if fired upon by enemy infantry
units. This represents that units in this mode are unwilling to
engage enemy troops as they are just trying to harass the enemy,
not fight them.

6.435 Cavalry Charge Tests
Cavalry that is ordered to charge must not only have the required
OP points and morale, but must also pass a morale test as per the
chart in 20.14. If the cavalry unit passes this test, it will
execute the charge as per 6.43. If the cavalry unit fails the
morale test, it will gain 1 disruption level and will revert to
normal formation.

6.436 Artillery Charge Reaction Tests
Artillery units that are charged by enemy cavalry will react,
based on a number of factors. Artillery can react by retreating
before the cavalry charge them, staying and firing until the last
minute, or panicking and getting overrun by the charging cavalry.

If the artillery unit being charged is in limbered formation, it
will automatically retreat 2 squares if charged by enemy cavalry
and will stay in limbered formation. This will occur regardless
of whether the unit is stacked with friendly infantry or not.
Even if the friendly infantry that is in square formation (and
thus invulnerable to cavalry charges), the artillery won't fit
inside the square and will therefore run away. Artillery in
limbered formation that retreat from a cavalry charge may gain
disruption.

Artillery that is unlimbered and stacked with an infantry unit
that is in square formation does not have to take a morale test
and will stay in formation and will even fire as long as enemy
units are not adjacent. Once an enemy unit comes adjacent to the
infantry square that the artillery unit is hiding in, the gunners
leave their guns and run inside the protection of the infantry
square, preventing them from firing.

If an artillery unit is unlimbered and is stacked with an
infantry unit that does not form square in the face of the
charge, the artillery unit will take a morale test (see 8.2).
Upon passing this test, the unit will stay and will fire during
the appropriate phase. The artillery can still be meleed by any
cavalry that survive the point-blank cannon barrage, but the
artillery unit will probably have a good chance of survival
against small number of enemy cavalry.

An unlimbered artillery unit that fails the morale test will do
one of two things depending on whether it began the cavalry
charge phase stacked with an infantry unit. If the artillery unit
was alone, it will be over-run by the charging cavalry unit. This
is generally catastrophic as the artillery unit goes to 0 ammo,
20 effectiveness, and gains both fatigue and disruption levels.
This will usually take the unit out of action for a long time.
If, however, the artillery unit was stacked with friendly
infantry and failed the morale test, then the artillery unit will
go to limbered formation and retreat 2 squares. The unit will
gain disruption from this retreat.


7.0 COMBAT PHASE

The combat phase is where all combat takes place, all casualties
are inflicted, and all combat results are implemented. The combat
phase is broken down in a specific sequence:
ù Cavalry Charge Phase
ù Mixed Artillery Fire Phase
ù Mixed Fire Phase
ù Cavalry Charge Melee Phase
ù Melee Phase
ù Retreat Phase/Advance Phase

Within each of these phases, all of the actual combat in the game
occurs. Casualties are inflicted during the fire and melee phases
based on a number of factors (see the Combat Tables in section
20.5 and 20.6). Casualties inflicted are measured in number of
enemy men that are killed, wounded, or otherwise taken out of the
battle. These are displayed during the fire phases a number of
"men lost". Units are eliminated when their number of men drops
below a certain point (usually 20). In addition to the number of
men lost, artillery fire can destroy enemy guns. If this happens,
a "# guns lost" message will appear.

Each shot that a unit takes reduces its ammunition supply by one
(see section 10.1).

7.1 Cavalry Charge Phase

This is the phase in which all cavalry charges are executed, all
counter-charges are executed, and all infantry reaction tests are
made. See section 6.43 for more information on cavalry charges.

7.2 Artillery Fire Phase

Artillery fire is resolved in this phase. Artillery units plotted
to fire on enemy units will do so, artillery units with NO PLOT
will select targets and fire at them. Artillery units with NO
FIRE plots will choose targets that are adjacent to them (if
there are any) and fire at them. The order in which artillery
fire is based on where the units are on the map and their unit
number.

There are some special restrictions on artillery fire. Artillery
will not fire at enemy units at a range greater than 7 unless
specifically ordered to. This is to simulate the fact that
historically, artillery Batteries had very limited amounts of
ammunition and long-range bombardment fire was of limited
effectiveness. Therefore, you must order artillery to fire at the
longer ranges, or they will not fire.

Artillery will also automatically retarget if ordered to fire at
an enemy at a range greater than 3 if there are enemy units
closer to the firing artillery unit by 3 squares. This is again
because the commander of the artillery Battery would not ignore
enemy units at such close range. To do so would be virtual
suicide in many circumstances.

Artillery units must have 4 OP points available in the Combat
Phase in order to fire. Note also that artillery suffer more
Fatigue from firing than do infantry.

Artillery that are unlimbered and stacked with friendly infantry
in square formation will be allowed to fire as long as no enemy
units are adjacent. When an enemy unit moves adjacent to such a
formation, the artillery stops firing as the gunners are assumed
to be hiding within the protection of the infantry squares.

7.3 Fire Phase

It is in this phase that the infantry units and dismounted
cavalry of each side fire their muskets and rifles at each other
in an effort to cause enough casualties to force the enemy troops
to lose Morale and organization until they finally melt away and
retreat or rout from the battle field. It is in this phase, and
the melee phase, that the battle is usually decided.

As in the Artillery Fire Phase, the order in which units fire is
determined by Readiness level (see section 8.4) and by random
factor. Firing units must have 1 OP point available during the
Combat Phase in order to fire.

7.4 Melee Phase

Melee is a form of combat where large formations of men, with
bayonets (long blades attached to the ends of their muskets and
rifles) and sabres engage in hand-to-hand combat and extremely
close range fire combat with enemy formations. It is usually very
lethal and yields huge casualties, even for the attacker. The
primary factor in melee combat is the number of men on each side.
Obviously, if one side has five times as many men as the other,
then that side is likely to win the melee. As with fire combat,
there are many modifiers that affect the combat result (see the
Melee Modifier chart in section 20.6).

Cavalry melee occurs before infantry melee and is just as lethal.
Cavalry units usually have very high melee factors and can often
destroy entire enemy units when they attack "en masse". Cavalry
melee is resolved first because even if friendly infantry wanted
to involve themselves in a melee with friendly cavalry, it is
just too dangerous. Therefore, if an enemy unit is targeted for
melee by both friendly cavalry and friendly infantry, the cavalry
attack will go first and then the infantry attack will go,
assuming that there are any defenders remaining.

Units that are forced to retreat during the Artillery fire Phase
cannot be attacked during the Melee Phase.

Remember that a unit must have two OP points remaining, above and
beyond the OP point required to fire, in order to melee an enemy
unit.

Artillery units may never initiate a melee. When they are
defending against melee and they are limbered, they defend at a
reduced strength.

7.5 Fire Effects

When a unit takes casualties, it may lose Efficiency. This has
the result of a lowering of Morale. In addition to the Efficiency
and Morale loss, a unit may also gain Disruption levels. The more
casualties a unit takes, the higher the amount of Efficiency lost
and Disruption gained. When Disruption reaches a certain level,
the unit may retreat or even rout.

7.51 RETREAT
When a defending unit retreats, as either a result of fire combat
or melee combat, it moves 3 squares in a direction generally away
from the enemy (attackers retreat only 1 square). The act of
retreating will cause the unit to lose Efficiency. Retreat is not
voluntary. Units that are forced to retreat will also take
additional casualties if the unit is forced to retreat through an
enemy ZOC.

If a retreating unit retreats through a friendly unit, or even a
square adjacent to a friendly unit, it is possible to cause that
friendly unit to gain a Disruption Level and/or lose Efficiency.
If this Disruption Level causes that unit to go up to three or
more Disruption Levels, then that unit may also be forced to
retreat. This can cause a "zipper" effect where a few retreating
units can cause other units to retreat with them, even though
those other units may not have had a single shot fired at them.
This has a pronounced effect on the battle and forces players of
this game to move heavily disrupted units further to the rear to
rest lest they become routed by other units running away.

Units that are within three squares of an enemy unit will always
retreat straight back, even through friendly forces. Once past
the three square limit, retreating units will attempt to avoid
running over friendly units, when possible. In addition, when a
unit reaches a range of three squares from enemy units, their
retreat will no longer cause friendly units to disrupt or lose
Efficiency.

Units in redoubts are immune to the above effects of having
friendly units retreat through/by them. In addition, units in
redoubts will not retreat unless routed.

A cavalry unit which ends its turn in an enemy ZOC and is not in
charge or counter-charge mode will automatically retreat.

In determining which units retreat first and which units advance
first, the order is based on whether it is the Allied turn or the
French turn. The Allied units retreat first if it is the French
turn, and vice versa. Thus, defending units usually are forced to
retreat first.

7.52 ROUT
Routing is the state a unit is in when everyone in the unit is
running for his life. The unit has no formation or cohesion and
is simply trying to get out of the battle. Units rout when they
reach Disruption level 5 (note that artillery never routs, it
just retreats).

Routed units will retreat seven squares during the phase in which
they rout, and will continue to rout 2 additional squares each
succeeding combat phase until they rally. In addition, all units
that were in the same square as the routing unit lose Efficiency
when the unit routs (see 7.51).

Units that are routing will follow the same retreating path as
they would if they were retreated and with the same rules. This
means that they will not even attempt to avoid friendly units
until they are 3 squares from the enemy.

Routed units may not fire and are virtually helpless in melee
combat. A routed unit which is attacked will rout again,
retreating seven additional squares.

Units which rout while in an enemy ZOC will lose a number of
casualties to capture.

7.53 ADVANCE
Units which caused an enemy unit to retreat will advance into the
vacated square if their advance flag was set to Y. See 6.433 for
advancing rules on cavalry.

The phasing player's units advance first during the advance
phase. This means that during the French turn, the French units
will advance first. This is directly opposite of the retreat
order (see 7.51).


8.0 DISRUPTION, READINESS, MORALE, FATIGUE, AND EFFICIENCY

8.1 Fatigue

A units Fatigue rating is an indication of how tired it is.
Fatigue directly affects combat, as is seen in the Fire/Melee
Strength Modifier Table (see section 20.6). Fatigue is gained by
moving, firing, meleeing, and several other actions, as are
summarized in the Fatigue Table (see section 20.9).

Fatigue is lost by having unused OP points left after the combat
phase. Each two OP point remaining reduces Fatigue by two point
(except if the unit in question is in the enemy ZOC, in which
case no Fatigue is recovered).

Since Fatigue is one of the two factors that determine a unit's
Morale, and thus its susceptibility to retreat and rout, it is
very important to let units that are very tired rest whenever
possible. Tired units will not fight as well as may rout when you
can least afford it.
One special note about Fatigue is that artillery units that are
extremely tired (more than 20 Fatigue) have a 50% chance of
receiving no ammo resupply during the ammo phase. This is to
represent that ammunition became a major factor during long
bombardments. Players must remember to have their tired artillery
cease firing until their ammunition levels can be replenished and
their Fatigue can be reduced.

8.2 Morale

A unit's Morale is equal to its Efficiency minus its Fatigue.
Morale directly affects how quickly a routed unit will rally, and
how much Disruption a unit gains from being subjected to fire and
melee combat. Since Morale is calculated from Efficiency and
Fatigue, resting a unit will quickly allow it to regain its
Morale.

During the play of a game, a unit will often be called upon to
take a "Morale test". this test is take when the unit in question
uses forced marching (see section 6.37), when a unit enters a
difficult terrain type (town, woods, or stream) while not using a
road, when stacking, when leaving an enemy ZOC, when changing
formation to either line or column while in an enemy ZOC, when a
unit takes at least 3% casualties from an enemy unit's fire, when
friendly units retreat past (within 1 square) the unit in
question (see 7.51), and when enemy cavalry charge a friendly
infantry unit that is not in square (see section 6.432). The
severity of the test varies as per the severity of the situation.

Failing a "Morale test" will cause a unit to gain Disruption,
anywhere from 1 to 5 levels, depending on the event.

There are special restrictions on units with Morale levels of 29
or less, preventing those units from entering an enemy ZOC or
from meleeing adjacent enemy units.

8.3 Efficiency

Efficiency is a measure of a unit's training, skill, and
durability in combat. It directly affects how well a unit
performs in fire combat and melee combat, as well as determining
a unit's Morale and resistance to casualties. As a unit take
casualties, its Efficiency drops. Efficiency is regained by
having had OP points left during the turn, just like Fatigue.
During the recovery phase, units regain this Efficiency.

Another way to get Efficiency back is to force enemy units to
retreat or rout. A unit can gain 6 Efficiency points by causing
an enemy unit to retreat by fire combat or melee combat, and 12
Efficiency points are gained by forcing an enemy unit to rout.
This represents the tremendous boost to a unit's spirit and
fighting will that can be gained by watching an enemy formation
retreat or flee from an attack.

Efficiency may never exceed the maximum Efficiency listed in the
Command Menu Information Area.

8.4 Readiness

Readiness represents a unit's level of preparedness for fighting.
This number ranges from 0 to 7, with 7 representing the highest
possible level of preparedness. Units gain one Readiness level
before each Operation Phase. Units may lose Readiness by moving,
with a chance of losing one level each time the unit moves a
square, down to a minimum of 3. Lower levels of Readiness can
only be achieved through changing of an objective during the
objective phase (see section 5.0).

The Readiness level of units directly affects their combat
strength, as per the Fire/Melee Strength Modifiers Table (see
section 20.6). This factor is applied to both melee and fire
combat.

The amount of Readiness lost when changing an objective is based
on the leader bonus of the commander of the unit in question. The
amount of Readiness lost can be between 2 and 4 levels.

8.5 Disruption

Disruption represents unit cohesiveness. In general, units in the
Napoleonic Era operated as units, with each individual performing
a specified task in a specified way. When the individuals became
disorganized, due to casualties, movement, or fear, the unit
quickly suffered.

Whenever a unit takes a Morale test from enemy fire (i.e., a unit
suffers 3% or more losses in a single enemy shot), that unit may
suffer from 0 to 3 levels of Disruption, modified by the unit's
formation and nationality (see Disruption Table 20.11). Units
that have Disruption levels of greater than one will be
restricted in the following manner:

Level 1 Disruption:
Unit suffers a 90% fire modifier

Level 2 Disruption:
Unit suffers a 80% fire modifier

Level 3 Disruption:
Unit suffers a 70% fire modifier, may not enter an enemy ZOC, and
may not melee adjacent enemy units

Level 4 Disruption:
Unit suffers a 60% fire modifier, may not enter an enemy ZOC,
will automatically retreat if fired upon, and may not melee
adjacent enemy units

Level 5 Disruption:
Unit suffers a 50% fire modifier, may not enter an enemy ZOC,
will automatically rout, if fired upon, may not melee adjacent
enemy units, and may not stack with friendly units

Units that move into difficult terrain (including town, swamp,
and woods) may gain a Disruption level. In addition, units can
gain a Disruption level from stacking with a friendly unit or
from leaving an enemy ZOC (see section 7.5 for the effects of
rout and retreat on Disruption). Units that take more than 14%
losses in a single enemy shot will automatically go to 5 levels
of Disruption.


9.0 COMMAND CONTROL

Command Control in The Battles of Napoleon represents a number of
factors, such as quality of leadership and speed at which orders
were received and carried out, which heavily influence several
factors on each unit. Everything from fire and melee strengths to
the number of operations points received are influenced by
Command Control. For this reason, it is important that you
understand how Command Control works and how to maximize your
Command Control ratings.

The primary sources for Command Control are the leaders on each
side. The closer a unit is to its leader, the better the Command
Control rating will be. This means that spreading your forces out
without regard to placement of leaders is unwise and will often
mean the difference between victory and defeat. As a general
rule, higher level commanders should be placed in the middle of
their commands, so as to give the greatest benefit to the largest
number of units.

9.1 Leaders

All units in The Battles of Napoleon, with the exception of
artillery, are under the command of leaders. Leaders represent
the individuals who historically commanded the forces at
historical Battles. In random scenarios, the names of the leaders
are real while their positions are random. Leaders are always
attached to a specific unit and provide a number of bonuses to
that unit for being there. No unit may have more than one leader
at a time, nor may a leader ever not be attached to a unit.

Leaders have a rating that varies between 0 and 15. This rating
has a number of uses, ranging from direct combat bonuses to
Command Control bonuses. As a general rule, leaders with a rating
of lower than 6 are probably incompetent with a rating below 4
being reserved for the leaders who were so poor as to be an
active detriment to a units health. An "average" leader would
probably be rated an 8, with a rating of 10 being good and 12+
being excellent.

9.11 LEADER LOSS
Leaders, because they are attached directly to units, are
vulnerable to enemy fire. If a unit with an attached leader is
subjected to enemy fire, there is a percentage chance that the
leader will become wounded. This chance increases with the
severity of the fire and lessens with the size of unit being
fired at. If the leader is wounded, a new leader will be
generated and placed in that command slot. The rating of this
leader will vary randomly, but will never be as good as the old
leader's rating.

9.12 LEADER TRANSFER
Leaders may only be moved from unit to unit during the Leader
Transfer Phase. The commands available during this phase are as
follows:

(SPACE BAR) - if accessed while the cursor is over a friendly
unit will allow access to that unit, allowing you to access the
leader transfer menu.

(E)xit Leader Phase - allows you to exit the Leader Transfer
Phase.

(O)bjectives - permits examination of friendly victory squares.

(0-8) - allows movement of the cursor (as per the movement
compass (see section 5.131)).

9.121 Leader Transfer Menu
In this menu, reached by accessing a unit with the space bar
during the Leader Transfer Phase, you are given several options
that permit you to examine the units in a leader's command,
transfer a leader from one unit to another, and highlight the
entire command to allow easy evaluation of the Command Control
situation.

(I)nverse - allows you to highlight the entire command for a
given leader. This is the same as the highlight command in the
Objective phase (see section 5.0).

(L)eader - permits access to a sub-menu where leaders may be
transferred.

(N)ext - allows rapid scrolling through all friendly units.

(Q)uit - takes you out of the selected unit and back to cursor
movement.

(U)nit - gets the next unit in the same square. This function is
the same as the function in the Command Menu.

9.13 LEADER EFFECTS ON COMMAND CONTROL RATING
Command control is a number, specific to each unit and ranging
between 10 and 30, that is calculated from the bonus ratings of
the leaders in a unit's command structure and the distance from
the unit to those leaders. The closer a unit is to its
commanders, the better its Command Control rating will be.

One important thing to remember is that lower level leaders,
those just above the unit in the command structure, are very
important to have close by. Being several squares from your army
commander is not very detrimental to a unit's Command Control
rating, but being several squares from a Division leader is
catastrophic. This is to force you to move units in historical
fashion, with regiments grouped close together.

9.2 Specific Effects of Command Control

Command Control ratings affect several factors, but none so
noticeably as Operation Points. The number of OP points a unit
receives is directly translatable from the unit's Command Control
Rating, as seen in the Operation Point Chart (see 20.8). At the
beginning of each turn, the Command Control ratings for all units
is calculated and Command Control penalties are assessed. The
number of asterisks appearing next to a leader's name during the
Command Control Phase is significant, with 4 being perfect and 1
being terrible. These ratings directly influence the Command
Control ratings of the units under a given leader's command.

In addition to the OP points restrictions imposed by a unit's
Command Control Rating, there are also effects on a unit's
ability to rally from Disruption or Rout and on a unit's chance
of receiving ammunition. Command Control plays an important part
in these cases as well. As can be seen, Command Control is vital
to the game. Keeping your Divisions tightly controlled and
together is the first rule to successful Napoleonic generalship.


10.0 RECOVERY, REINFORCEMENT, AND RESUPPLY

This section covers several phases of the game, all of which have
to do with reorganization and resupply. During the play of the
game, units lose Efficiency, gain Fatigue, expend ammunition, and
lose men. During these phases, they get them back to a limited
extent.

10.1 Ammunition

At the beginning of a game, all units have 7 shots of ammunition.
This means that they may fire 7 times before they are out of
ammunition and will suffer the penalties appropriate to their
unit type. However, each turn all units are checked for
ammunition resupply. This occurs, for both players, during the
Ammunition Resupply Phase of each turn. Units which have 7
ammunition points already and routed units will not receive any
ammo resupply. All other units have a chance of receiving a
partial ammunition resupply.

The chance of a given unit receiving ammo resupply is based on
several factors, including being adjacent to enemy units (the
more enemy units a friendly unit is adjacent to, the lower the
chance of ammo resupply), command Control rating, and Fatigue.
Note specifically that artillery units with more than 20 Fatigue
have less than a 50% chance of receiving ammunition resupply.

Units which are out of ammo cannot fire in fire combat and have a
much reduced strength in melee combat (see section 20.6 -
Fire/Melee Strength Modifiers).

10.2 Rally

During the Rally Phases of each turn, all friendly routed units
will attempt to return to non-routed status. This is known as
rallying. In order to rally, a unit's Morale must be greater than
29 and there cannot be an enemy unit within 5 squares and in LOS.
The chance of rallying is displayed on the Rally Table (section
20.7) and varies from 50 - 100%.

Units that rally go to open formation and have their Disruption
set to 3.

10.3 Recovery

Recovery is the term applied to the regaining of Efficiency and
the loss of Fatigue that occurs during the Recover/OP Points
Phases of each turn. Units that are left in combat too long and
not allowed to recover will quickly deteriorate and eventually
rout. To prevent this, you should try to rotate your units into
and out of combat, allowing each unit to rest between turns in
the front lines.

Disruption levels are lost during the Recover/OP Points Phases of
each turn. Units will lose between 0 and 2 levels of Disruption
depending on the Efficiency and command Control of the unit.
Routed units cannot recover Disruption levels.

Units recover Fatigue based on the number of OP points that the
unit has left during the Recover/OP Points Phases. For more
details, see Fatigue (section 8.1).

Efficiency, like Fatigue, is recovered during the Recovery/OP
Points Phases. The rate at which units regain Efficiency is
listed in the section on Efficiency (see section 8.3).

In addition to recovery of Fatigue and Efficiency, units regain
their OP points based on their Command Control Rating, during the
Recover/OP Points Phases. This means that units will always have
OP points available for combat, even if they used every OP point
during their movement and combat phases. However, OP points
expended during the Combat Phase occurring right before a
friendly Operations Phase will be subtracted from the OP points
available at the start of the next Operations Phase. Thus, it is
possible to start an Operations Phase with less OP points than
you received during the last Recover/OP Points Phase.

10.4 Reinforcements

Reinforcements are troops that arrive after the beginning of a
game, from a specific reinforcement square. In the historical
scenarios, the reinforcement squares are listed in the Order of
Battle for each scenario. However, in custom generated scenarios,
the reinforcement squares must be decided upon and placed during
the Set Squares phase of the scenario creation process (see
section 19.0).

Reinforcements will arrive in column formation if they are
infantry, limbered mode if artillery, and normal mode if cavalry.
They will arrive during the Reinforcement Phase of the turn they
are scheduled to appear on, unless the options on the Game Menu
varying this reinforcement time were altered (see section 4.1).

If reinforcements are blocked from entering by enemy troops, they
will come in adjacent to the reinforcement square. Reinforcements
may overstack on the entry square during the turn of entry, but
must obey normal stacking restrictions as soon as they are moved
(see section 6.34).

11.0 VICTORY PHASE

This is the phase in which the score is counted and the status of
the game is announced, be it an Allied Victory or a French
Victory. Upon reaching the Victory Phase of the final game turn
of the scenario, the final score will be tallied and a winner
will be announced.

Winning and losing the game is based on two primary factors, the
taking of terrain objectives, that is taking specific places and
occupying them with friendly troops, and causing enemy
casualties. These factors are translated into "Victory Points",
or VPs, and then totaled and compared to the scenario Victory
Schedule in order to determine a winner.

11.1 Victory Points

Players receive victory points for causing enemy casualties
according to the following chart:

1 point per infantryman/artilleryman/cavalryman lost (either
wounded, killed, or missing)

1.5 point per infantryman/artilleryman/cavalryman captured

50 points per artillery gun lost

100 points per artillery gun captured

In addition to the above casualty points, VPs are received for
the taking of objectives. These objectives vary from scenario to
scenario (and must be selected by the player in a custom made
scenario - see section 19.0) and generally are the factors that
control the victor in the scenario. In order to receive VPs for
an objective, a player must have 1000 men in the objective
square, or adjacent to it, at the beginning of a turn. The VPs
awarded for capture of an objective are lost if the required
number of men is not in the area at the beginning of a new turn.

12.0 DESIGNING YOUR OWN SCENARIOS

Designing your own custom scenarios requires use of the Editor
portion of the game. The rules for using the Editor are
thoroughly covered in sections 14.0 through 19.0 and should be
read in detail before any attempt is made to customize a
scenario. The scenarios presented in section 13.0 are also able
to be modified. It is suggested that you play with those
scenarios before trying to design a new one from scratch.

Although it is not necessary that one be a student of the
Napoleonic Era in order to get the most from this game, there
will undoubtedly be many references to types of troops,
nationalities, and formations that don't make much sense to
someone who isn't a military historian. As a general rule, if it
isn't explained in detail in these rules, it is not vital to
know. You can still design scenarios using Dragoons and Hussars
without knowing what they are.

If you decide to design scenarios, you should read the
advertisement in the back of the rules. This advertisement
discusses how to get additional scenario disks and how to send in
your scenarios for possible publication. If you are willing to
put in the time on the design, we are interested in seeing the
scenarios. Historical notes would also be valuable, describing
the battle in a few paragraphs.

12.1 Night Turns
Although all of the historical scenarios presented in this game
were resolved in one day of battle, not all Napoleonic actions
were as short. If you make a scenario with the editor and allow
it to last longer than one day, you will find that each day is
separated by a night turn. The night turn has a number of special
rules (see section 19.1).
                     
                     
                     BATTLES OF NAPOLEON
                              
                    HISTORICAL SCENARIOS
                              
         BORODINO: THE BATTLE FOR THE GREAT REDOUBT
                              
                   THE BATTLE OF AUERSTADT
                              
                  THE BATTLE OF QUATRE BRAS
                              
                   THE BATTLE OF WATERLOO

13.0 HISTORICAL SCENARIOS
Legend of Scenarios

Unit # is the number of the unit and determines the order in
which units are chosen using the (N)ext command from the Command
Menu (see section 6.3).

Unit Name is the individual designation of the unit as well as
any special designations (LN, GD, etc.).

Type/Size shows the type of unit (infantry, cavalry, artillery),
any special info (Guard, Brunswick, KGL, etc.), and the size
(Battalion, regiment, brigade).

Men gives the number of men the unit starts the scenario with.

Guns/Skirm represents either the number of men in the unit
capable of skirmishing (for infantry units) or the number of guns
in the unit (for artillery units).

Eff shows the starting efficiency for the unit. Note that if the
unit is not at maximum efficiency at the beginning of the
scenario, it will "grow back" during the game, up to the maximum
level of the unit.

Wpn lists the weapon the unit is equipped with. See chart 20.5
for information.

Leader gives the leader that the unit reports to directly.

Turn lists the turn that the unit appears as a reinforcement.
Note that units with a 1 in this column start the game on the
map.

X, Y shows the starting location for the unit, if the unit starts
on the map, or the square that the unit comes in at as a
reinforcement.

ABBREVIATIONS USED IN THE SCENARIO LISTINGS

Art. = Artillery    Cuir. = Cuirassier Huss. = Hussar   Lt. = Light
Batt. = Battalion   Div. = Division    Inf. = Infantry  Lw. = Landwehr
Brig. = Brigade     Dr. = Dragoon      Jg. = Jaeger   Mil. = Militia
Bruns. = Brunswick  Emp. = Empress     KGL = King's   Reg = Regiment
Cav. = Cavalry      Gd. = Guard        German Legion Sp. = Spanish
Hann. = Hannoverian Ln = Line

13.1 Borodino: The Battle for the Great Redoubt

In June of 1812, Napoleon embarked on his most famous, and most
disastrous, campaign: the invasion of Russia. Throughout the
summer, the French and the Russians fought a series of indecisive
battles which led to the Russians retreating further into their
homeland. By September, Napoleon wanted a battle which would end
the conflict before winter's onset and the Russians wanted to
fight before reaching the gates to Moscow. Borodino was the
result.

The pivotal Russian defense position at Borodino was a series of
entrenchments and breastworks atop a hill that became known as
the Great Redoubt. The job of taking this fortress fell to the
men in Eugene's corps. Supported by no less than 120 artillery
pieces, Eugene's infantry stormed up the hill in the morning of
the 7th of September. The lead regiment in Morrand's division
reached the breastworks directly after their opponents had
discharged their cannons. Taking fearsome casualties, the French
managed to invest the redoubt and gain control of most of it.
Russian counterattacks, however, threw the French back down the
hill and recaptured the defensive works. As the 30th Infantry
Regiment retreated down the slope, they were struck by an entire
brigade of Russian dragoons. By the end of the day, only 11
officers and 257 men remained in the regiment.

Fighting off several cavalry attacks, the French managed to
stabilize the situation and by 2:00 PM the French were ready to
assault the redoubt a second time. Led by Gerard's division and
supported by Morrand's and Broussier's, the French charged up the
hill. On Gerard's left, Montbrun's cavalry moved forward to flank
the redoubt. No fewer than 400 guns pounded the Russian defenses.
As Montbrun led his corps to the attack, he was killed by Russian
artillery fire. General August de Caulaincourt took command of
the corps and led the 5th Cuirassiers around to the rear of the
redoubt. As his men engaged the Russian gunners, the General was
killed by a musket ball. The French cavalry began to waver as the
Russian resistance stiffened. Just in time, the French 9th
Regiment of Line poured into the redoubt's western side and
caught the Russian defenders in a trap. The Russians were quickly
overwhelmed and the French took possession of the redoubt for the
second time. Despite several Russian counterattacks, the French
managed to hold on to their gain. The Russians pulled back, due
to the French controlled salient in their center. However, the
French, totally exhausted, were unable to exploit their gains.
The battle ended shortly after 5:00 PM, with both armies trying
to regain their strength.

Napoleon gained the field at Borodino and opened the road to
Moscow. However, his army was weakened by the battle and would
soon be forced to retreat through the terrible Russian winter. By
the end of 1812, the Grand Armee ceased to exist as a fighting
force.

13.11 ORDERS OF BATTLE

French Order of Battle

Unit Unit     Type/Size     Men Guns/  Eff    Wpn     Leader  Turn X,Y
#  Name                         Skirm
0  1/13/1 LT  Lt. Inf. Reg. 758  758   68     MUS     Morrand   1  5,5
1  2/13/1 LT  Lt. Inf. Reg. 758  758   68     MUS     Morrand   1  5,5
2  1/17/1 LT  Lt. Inf. Reg. 887  887   68     MUS     Morrand   1  5,7
3  2/17/1 LT  Lt. Inf. Reg. 887  887   68     MUS     Morrand   1  5,7
4  1/30/1 LN  Infantry Reg. 827  138   58     MUS     Morrand   1  5,8                                                         
5  2/30/1 LN  Infantry Reg. 827  138   58     MUS     Morrand   1  5,8
6  1/7/3 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg  830  830   68     MUS     Gerard    1  1,10
7  2/7/3 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg. 830  830   68     MUS     Gerard    1  0,9
8  1/12/3 LN  Infantry Reg. 855  142   58     MUS     Gerard    1  1,9
9  2/12/3 LN  Infantry Reg. 855  142   58     MUS     Gerard    1  1,10
10 1/21/3 LN  Infantry Reg  843  140   58     MUS     Gerard    1  0,10
11 2/21/3 LN  Infantry Reg. 843  140   58     MUS     Gerard    1  0,10
12 127/3 SA LN Saxony  Reg. 612  102   38     MUS     Gerard    1  1,9
13 8/3 SA LN   Saxony  Reg. 484  81    38     MUS     Gerard    1  0,9
14 1/9/14 LN  Infantry Reg. 704  117   58     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
15 2/9/14 LN  Infantry Reg. 704  117   58     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
16 18/14 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg. 565  565   68     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
17 1/35/14 LN Infantry Reg. 680  113   58     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
18 2/35/14 LN Infantry Reg. 680  113   58     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
19 1/53/14 LN Infantry Reg. 737  123   58     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
20 2/53/14 LN Infantry Reg. 737  123   58     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
21 2JN/14 SP LN Sp.Inf.Reg. 597   99   38     MUS     Broussier 3  0,9
22 1/3 CV LT CH  Lt.Cav.Brig. 1194 -   68     SBR     Grouchy   1  0,12
23 2/3 CV LT CH  Lt.Cav.Brig. 1303 -   68     SBR     Grouchy   1  0,11
24 1/6 CV HV DR  Hvy.Cav.Brig. 814 -   78     MUS     Grouchy   1  1,11
25 2/6 CV HV DR  Hvy.Cav.Brig. 901 -   78     MUS     Grouchy   1  1,12
26 1/IIICC HS Horse Art.Batt. 96   6   78     6G      -         1  0,13
27 2/IIICC HS Horse Art.Batt. 96   6   68     6G      -         1  0,13
28 3/IIICC HS Horse Art.Batt. 96   6   78     8G      -         1  0,13
29 1 Div FT   Artillery Batt.128   8   78     8G      -         1   5,6
30 3 Div FT   Artillery Batt.128   8   78     8G      -         1   6,12
31 1/III FT   Artillery Batt.128   8   78     8G      -         1   5,9
32 2/III FT   Artillery Batt.128   8   78     8G      -         1   5,6
33 3/III FT   Artillery Batt.128   8   78     8G      -         1   6,12
34 4/III HV   Artillery Batt.128   8   78     12G     -         1   5,10
35 14 Div FT  Artillery Batt.128   8   78     12G     -         3   0,8
36 1/IV FT    Artillery Batt.384   24  78     8G      -         1   10,1
37 2/IV FT    Artillery Batt.128   8   78     8G      -         1    9,1
38 3/IV FT    Artillery Batt.128   8   78     8G      -         1   11,1
39 4/IV FT    Artillery Batt.256   16  78     12G     -         1   12,1

Allied Order of Battle
            
Unit Unit     Type/Size        Men Guns/  Eff    Wpn Leader   Turn  X,Y
#    Name                          Skirm
90  SMO/12 LN Infantry Reg.    908  -     68     MUS Paskevich  1  16,10
91  NAR/12 LN Infantry Reg.    837  -     68     MUS Paskevich  1  16,12
92  6/12 JG   Lt. Inf. Reg.    577  577   68     MUS Paskevich  1  16,11
93  OR/26 LN  Infantry Reg.    780  -     68     MUS Likachev   1  14,8
94  NIZ/26 LN Infantry Reg.    805  -     68     MUS Likachev   1  16,9
95  5/26 JG   Lt. Inf. Reg.    593  593   68     MUS Likachev   1  16,7
96  42/26 JG  Lt. Inf. Reg.    612  612   68     MUS Likachev   1  16,7
97  19/24 JG  Lt. Inf. Reg.    784  784   68     MUS Kataisov   1  16,13
98  TOM/24 LN Infantry Reg.    904  -     68     MUS Kataisov   1  24,13
99  BEL/17 LN Infantry Reg.    985  -     68     MUS Voronzov   1  27,8
100 BRE/17 LN Infantry Reg.    930  -     68     MUS Voronzov   2  27,8
101 RYA/17 LN Infantry Reg.    837  -     68     MUS Voronzov   2  27,8
102 NIL/17 LN Infantry Reg.    764  -     68     MUS Voronzov   2  27,8
103 1/IIIC LT HU  Lt.Cav.Brig. 1205 -     78     SBR Kreutz     2  27,9
104 2/IIIC LT HU  Lt.Cav.Brig  1193 -     78     SBR Kreutz     2  27,9
105 3/IIIC HV DR  Hvy. Cav.Brg 614  -     78     MUS Kreutz     2  27,9
106 IIIC/Art HS   Horse Art.Batt.96 6     78     6G  -          2  27,8
107 Res/A FT CR   Artillery Reg.256 10    88     12G -          1  14,8
108 Res/B FT CR   Artillery Reg.256 10    88     12G -          1  14,8

13.2 The Battle of Auerstadt

Napoleon's 1806 campaign against the Prussian army climaxed on
October 14th with the dual Battle of Jena-Auerstadt. Napoleon,
with the main portion of the French army, engaged what he thought
was the entire Prussian army. In fact, Napoleon only faced the
Prussian right wing consisting of some 30,000 men while Marshal
Davout, in command of the 28,000 men of 1st Corps, faced the Duke
of Brunswick and his main force of over 50,000 men.

Davout ordered his advance units to cross the Hassenhausen
plateau and to take up positions in Hassenhausen. When General
Gudin's division did so, they ran right into General Bluecher and
some 600 Prussian horsemen. The Prussians charged only to be
repulsed by the infantry and artillery fire from Gudin's
division. Bluecher fell back and called for more cavalry while
Gudin solidified his position on the plateau. The Duke of
Brunswick released 12 squadrons to Bluecher and brought up two
divisions of infantry to attack the French positions.

Bluecher, upon receiving reinforcement, immediately charged the
French without waiting for infantry support. His squadrons
quickly spent themselves upon the stout French squares and the
Prussian cavalry soon scattered to the rear. The French forces
had held against the first assault. Fortunately, because the
Prussian cavalry attack was made without infantry support,
Gudin's division was able to regroup before the main Prussian
body contacted them. The two Prussian infantry divisions led by
Schmettau and Wartensleben attacked the French forces around
Hassenhausen, but failed to dislodge them before Gudin was
reinforced by the arrival of Marshal Davout and the rest of the
French forces. The Prussian attack began to lose strength. Then
disaster struck the Prussians. The Duke of Brunswick was mortally
wounded and his army lost what little hope it had of maintaining
the initiative. Davout ordered his troops to counterattack and
Morand's division, having just arrived on the field, went on the
offensive after beating off yet another cavalry attack by the
Prussians.

Hesitation in the Prussian high command proved to be the final
nail in the Prussian army's coffin. King Frederick Wilhelm III
held his remaining corps in reserve while his army was being
destroyed piecemeal by Davout's corps. The Prussian army began to
melt under the French counterattack and they soon went from
retreat to rout. Eventually, the Prussian reserve was engaged and
routed as well. Although Davout's Corps suffered heavily, the
battle was won. In the days that followed, the pursuit of the
Prussian army yielded thousands of captured troops and signaled
the final destruction of the image of Prussian "Invincibility".

13.21 ORDERS OF BATTLE
French Order of Battle
Unit Unit    Type/Size      Men  Guns/  Eff  Wpn    Leader   Turn   X,Y
#    Name                        Skirm
0  1/13 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt. 750  750    78   MUS    Guyardet   5   43,23
1  2/13/LT   Lt. Inf. Batt. 750  750    78   MUS    Guyardet   5   43,23
2  1/17 LN   Infantry Batt. 1040 130    78   MUS    Lanusse    5   43,23
3  2/17 LN   Infantry Batt. 1040 130    78   MUS    Lanusse    21* 43,23
4  1/30 LN   Infantry Batt. 1025 128    78   MUS    Valterre   5   43,23
5  2/30 LN   Infantry Batt. 1025 128    78   MUS    Valterre   5   43,23
6  1/51 LN   Infantry Batt. 1585 198    78   MUS    Baille     5   43,23
7  2/51 LN   Infantry Batt. 1585 198    78   MUS    Baille     5   43,23
8  1/61 LN   Infantry Batt. 1570 196    78   MUS    Nicolas    5   43,23
9  2/61 LN   Infantry Batt. 1570 196    78   MUS    Nicolas    5   43,23
10 1/33 LN   Infantry Batt. 1020 128    78   MUS    Cartier    3   43,23
11 2/33 LN   Infantry Batt. 1020 128    78   MUS    Cartier    3   43,23
12 1/48 LN   Infantry Batt.  805 101    78   MUS    Barbngre   3   43,23
13 2/48 LN   Infantry Batt.  805 101    78   MUS    Barbngre   3   43,23     
14 1/108 LN  Infantry Batt.  810 102    78   MUS    Higonet    2   43,23
15 2/108 LN  Infantry Batt.  810 102    78   MUS    Higonet    2   43,23
16 1/111 LN  Infantry Batt. 1170 146    78   MUS    Gay        2   43,23
17 2/111 LN  Infantry Batt. 1170 146    78   MUS    Gay        2   43,23
18 1/12 LN   Infantry Batt. 1025 128    78   MUS    Verges     1   43,23
19 2/12 LN   Infantry Batt. 1025 128    78   MUS    Verges     1   43,23
20 1/21 LN   Infantry Batt. 1135 142    78   MUS    Decous     1   43,23
21 2/21 LN   Infantry Batt. 1135 142    78   MUS    Decous     1   43,23
22 1/25 LN   Infantry Batt.  900 115    80   MUS    Cassagne   1   36,18
23 2/25 LN   Infantry Batt.  900 115    80   MUS    Cassagne   1   37,16
24 1/85 LN   Infantry Batt. 1085 136    84   MUS    Viala      1   37,22
25 2/85 LN   Infantry Batt. 1085 136    84   MUS    Viala      1   36,20
26 1 Chass LT CH  Lt.Cav.Reg.400  64    -    SBR    Vialanns   1   39,19
27 2 Chass LT CH  Lt.Cav.Reg.530  78    -    SBR    Vialanns   2   43,22
28 12 Chass LT CH Lt Cav.Reg.470  78    -    SBR    Vialanns   2   43,22
29 1 Light HS Horse Art. Bat.140   6    78    4G    -          4   43,23
30 1 Foot FT  Artillery Batt.100   6    78    8G    -          4   43,23
31 2 Light HS Horse Art. Bat. 40   2    78    4G    -          2   43,23
32 2 Foot FT  Artillery Batt.130   6    78    8G    -          3   43,23
33 3 Light HS Horse Art. Bat. 40   2    64    4G    -          1   36,19
34 3 Foot FT  Artillery Batt. 80   6    78    8G    -          2   43,23
35 1/R Foot FT Artillery Batt 120  6    78    8G    -          8   43,23
36 2/R Foot FT Artillery Batt.120  6    78    8G    -          8   43,23
37 3/R Foot FT Artillery Batt. 80  4    78   H5.5   -          8   43,23


Prussian Order of Battle
Unit Unit          Type/Size        Men Guns/  Eff  Wpn Leader Turn  X,Y
#    Name                               Skirm
90   Schack GR     Grenadier Batt.  680   -    38   MUS Alvnslbn 1   26,15
91   1/Hnrch LN    Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Alvnslbn 1   22,11
92   2/Hnrch LN    Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Alvnslbn 1   22,11
93   1/Alvslb LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Alvnslbn 1   22,12
94   2/Alvslb LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Alvnslbn 1   22,12
95   Krafft GR     Grenadier Batt.  735   -    58   MUS Schmnski 1   22,15
96   1/Mishky LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Schmnski 1   23,13
97   2/Mishky LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Schmnski 1   22,13
98   1/Shmsky LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Schmnski 1   22,14
99   2/Shmsky LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Schmnski 1   22,14
100  Hanstein GR   Grenadier Batt.  735   -    58   MUS Wedell   1   8,13
101  1/Renard LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Wedell   1   7,13
102  2/Renard LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Wedell   1   7,13
103  1/Kleist LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Wedell   1   6,13
104  2/Kleist LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Wedell   1   6,13
105  AltBraun GR   Grenadier Batt   735   -    58   MUS Renouard 1   6,14
106  1/Brnswg LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Renouard 1   5,14
107  2/Brnswg LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Renouard 1   5,14
108  1/LFerdn LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Renouard 1   5,15
109  2/LFerdn LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Renouard 1   5,15
110  Rheinbbn GR   Grenadier Batt   735   -    58   MUS Heinrich 2   1,13
111  1/Ferdnd LN   Infantry Batt.   800   -    48   MUS Heinrich 2   1,13
112  2/Ferdnd LN   Infantry Batt.   800   -    48   MUS Heinrich 2   1,13
113  1/Putkmr LN   Infantry Batt.   785   -    48   MUS Heinrich 2   1,13
114  2/Putkmr LN   Infantry Batt.   785   -    48   MUS Heinrich 2   1,13
115  Knebel GR     Grenadier Batt   735   -    58   MUS Luetzow  2   1,13                      
116  1/Molndf LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Luetzow  2   1,13                  
117  2/Molndf LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Luetzow  2   1,13
118  1/Wartlb LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Luetzow  2   0,13
119  2/Wartlb LN   Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Luetzow  2   0,13
120  Schliefn GR   Grenadier Batt   735   -    58   MUS Mishtzky 10  1,13
121  Huelsen GR    Grenadier Batt.  735   -    58   MUS Mishtzky 10  1,13 
122  1/Zenge LN    Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Mishtzky 10  1,13
123  2/Zenge LN    Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Mishtzky 10  1,13
124  Gaudy GR      Grenadier Batt.  735   -    58   MUS Zenge    10  1,13
125  Osten GR      Grenadier Batt.  735   -    48   MUS Zenge    10  1,13
126  1/Arnim LN    Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Zenge    10  1,13
127  2/Arnim LN    Infantry Batt.   790   -    48   MUS Zenge    10  1,13
128  1/Pirch LN    Infantry Batt.   815   -    48   MUS Zenge    10  0,13
129  2/Pirch LN    Infantry Batt.   815   -    48   MUS Zenge    10  0,13
130  Rabiel GR     Grenadier Batt.  735   -    58   MUS Zastrow  10  0,13
131  August GR     Grenadier Batt.  735   -    58   MUS Zastrow  10  0,13
132  1/Koenig LN   Infantry Batt.   800   -    48   MUS Zastrow  10  0,13
133  2/Koenig LN   Infantry Batt.   800   -    48   MUS Zastrow  10  0,13
134  GrenGD GD     Guard Batt.      780   -    58   MUS Hrschfld  6  0,24
135  LeibGD GD     Guard Batt.      785   -    58   MUS Hrschfld  6  0,24
136  1/Guard GD    Guard Batt.      785   -    58   MUS Hrschfld  6  0,24
137  2/Guard GD    Guard Batt.      785   -    58   MUS Hrschfld  6  0,24
138  WeimarSS JG   Jaeger Batt.     530  530   48   MUS Oswald    8  0,13
139  Kloch FU      Fusilier Batt.   650  650   48   MUS Oswald    8  0,13
140  Oswald FU     Fusilier Batt.   650  650   48   MUS Oswald    8  0,13
141 Grfnbrg FU     Fusilier Batt.   650  650   48   MUS Oswald    8  0,13
142 Koenigin HV DR Dragoon Reg.    1200   -    48   CRB Irwing    1 27,12
143 Heising HV CU  Cuirassier Reg.  600   -    58   SBR Buenting  1  3,14
144 Buenting HV CU Cuirassier Reg.  600   -    58   SBR Buenting  1  3,14
145 Quitzow HV CU  Cuirassier Reg.  600   -    58   SBR Quitzow   2  0,14
146 Rtznstn HV CU  Cuirassier Reg.  600   -    58   SBR Quitzow   2  0,14
147 LeibKur HV CU  Cuirassier Reg.  600   -    58   SBR Wilhelm   2  0,14
148 LeibKrbr HV CA Carabinier Reg.  710   -    58   CRB Wilhelm   2  0,14         
149 GdCorps GD CU  Cuirassier Reg.  660   -    58   SBR Beeren    2  0,14
150 Gensdrms CU    Cuirassier Reg.  600   -    58   SBR Beeren    2  0,14
151 Beeren HV CU   Cuirassier Reg.  600   -    58   SBR Beeren    2  0,14
152 Wurtmbrg LT HU Lt. Huss. Reg.  1210   -    8    SBR Bluecher  1  28,11
153 Bluecher LT HU Lt. Huss. Reg.  1100   -    8    SBR Bluecher  1  28,11
154 Irwing HV DR   Dragoon Reg.     550   -    38   CRB Bluecher  1  28,12
155 Roehl HL FT    Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       1  21,13
156 Stankar FT     Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       1  21,13
157 Graumann HS    Horse Art.Batt.  170   8    58   6/9   -       1  24,11
158 Wilkens FT     Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       1  4,15
159 Heuser FT      Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       1  4,15
160 Lange FT       Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       1  3,15
161 Riemer FT      Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       2  0,13
162 Lehmann FT     Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       2  0,13
163 Merkatz HS     Horse Art. Batt. 170   8    58   6/9   -       2  0,13
164 Willmann HS    Horse Art.Batt.  170   8    58   6/9   -       2  0,13
165 Buchelbg FT    Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -      10  0,13
166 Heiden FT      Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -      10  0,13
167 Alkier FT      Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -      10  0,14
168 Faber FT       Artillery Batt.  160   8    58   12/10 -       6  0,24
169 Schorlmr HS    Horse Art. Batt.  60   3    28   6/9   -       1  25,15
                                                            
*Note that the French unit that enters on turn 21 never actually
fought in the battle and will not appear during the game unless
the game length is modified. This unit is included only for
historical accuracy and for what-if scenarios.

13.3 The Battle of Quatre Bras

In June 1815, Napoleon was faced with the most serious dilemma of
his military life. All around him, France's enemies were
mobilizing to crush his resurgent power. Determined to strike at
the separated allied armies before they could form into an
invincible force, Napoleon set out with an army of 125,000 men to
surprise his enemies in Belgium. Deciding to attack both the
Anglo-Dutch army and the Prussian army simultaneously, Napoleon
gave command of the left wing of the army to Marshal Ney, to
attack the Anglo-Dutch at Quatre Bras, while Napoleon himself led
the right wing and the Imperial Guard against the Prussians at
Ligny.

Ney was ordered to take the I and II Corps, along with the III
Cavalry Cops, and attack the Anglo-Dutch positions at Quatre
Bras. He was to capture this vital road net in order to prevent
the Prussian Army, under General Bluecher, from joining with
Wellington's force. Ney, left to his own devices, was cautious
and waited until 11:00 on the morning of the 16th before issuing
orders to his subordinates. Finally, the word went out and the
French advance began around 1:30.

The French advance, starting late, was further delayed by being
extremely cautious. The French commanders were fearful that the
British were lying in ambush behind the thick fields of tall corn
or behind the gentle slopes which dotted the landscape. These
very techniques were the favorite tactics of the Duke of
Wellington and had been used with devastating effectiveness
during the Peninsular campaigns. However, the local Allied
commander had but 8,000 troops with which to defend Quatre Bras.
Worse still, most of these troops were either Dutch or Belgian
infantry of dubious quality at best. In order to deceive the
French as to the actual number of Allied troops present,
Wellington ordered the 27th Jager Battallion to deploy in front
of the main defense line in a mile-long perimeter. This totally
over extended the unit and they were all but wiped out in the
ensuing battle. However, the effect had been to slow the French
advance, buying more time for the Allied army.

The first major French assault was on the line formed in front of
Quatre Bras, with the village of Pireaumont on the left flank,
the Bossu Woods on the right flank, and the Farmhouse at
Gemioncourt in the center. Slowly the French drove the defenders
back, taking Pireaumont and beginning the push into the Bossu
Woods. However, in the center the French assault was stalled by
stiff resistance put up by the Dutch 5th Militia in the
Gemioncourt farmhouse.

Meanwhile, Ney found himself deprived of D'Erlon's I Cops by the
order of Napoleon. I Corps had been ordered to attack the
Prussian flank at Ligny. Ney ordered them back, only to be
countermanded again by an Emperor who knew little of the events
taking place at Quatre Bras. They ended up spending most of the
day marching back and forth.

Ney found himself in a quickly deteriorating situation. He still
outnumbered the enemy, but they were rapidly building while Ney's
forces were dwindling. At this critical moment, Ney ordered a
cavalry charge by Pire's lancers. The initial charge crushed the
27th Dutch Jagers, only to be halted by the 5th Infantry Division
led by General Picton. The Allies, bolstered by Picton's 5th and
others, managed to fight the French to a standstill. Ney tried to
force Wellington's center with two divisions, only to be once
again repulsed by point-blank musket fire. This, combined with
the arrival of information that D'Erlon's I Corps was on its way
back to Ligny, frustrated Ney beyond all reason. Ney turned to
General Kellerman, in command of the III Cavalry Corps, and
ordered him to charge, without infantry support, the reinforced
enemy line. After futile protest, Kellerman led his 800
Cuirassiers forward in a reckless charge that overran several
unprepared infantry regiments, including the 69th and 33rd
Regiments of Foot, and even reached the contested crossroads in
Quatre Bras.

Unsupported as they were, they were then attacked by concealed
batteries of cannon and fresh infantry battalions and forced to
flee back through the swath they had cut in the Allied lines.

Ney, now outnumbered and pressed by British counter-attacks all
along his line, pulled back and waited for night. The Battle for
Quatre Bras was over, and before the end of the day the original
Anglo-Dutch lines would be recaptured. It was a draw in every
sense of the word, something Napoleon could ill afford at this
stage.


13.31 ORDERS OF BATTLE

French Order of Battle
Unit Unit    Type/Size       Men Guns/  Eff  Wpn    Leader  Turn  X,Y
#    Name                        Skirm                          
0  1L/2 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  578  578   78   MUS    Husson    1  26,31
1  2L/2 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  569  569   78   MUS    Husson    1  26,31
2  3L/2 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  577  577   78   MUS    Husson    1  26,31
3  4L/2 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  570  570   78   MUS    Husson    1  26,33
4  1/61 LN   Infantry Batt.  423  71    68   MUS    Husson    1  26,33
5  2/61 LN   Infantry Batt.  407  68    68   MUS    Husson    1  26,33
6  1/72 LN   Infantry Batt.  483  81    68   MUS    Campy     1  29,33
7  2/72 LN   Infantry Batt.  487  81    68   MUS    Campy     1  29,33
8  1/108 LN  Infantry Batt.  415  69    68   MUS    Campy     1  28,31
9  2/108 LN  Infantry Batt.  406  68    68   MUS    Campy     1  28,31
10 3/108 LN  Infantry Batt.  251  42    68   MUS    Campy     1  28,31
11 1L/1 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  616  616   78   MUS    Baduin    1  13,36
12 2L/1 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  621  621   78   MUS    Baduin    1  13,36
13 3L/1 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  615  615   78   MUS    Baduin    1  13,36
14 1L/3LT    Lt. Inf. Batt.  590  590   78   MUS    Baduin    1  13,37
15 2L/3LT    Lt. Inf. Batt.  581  581   78   MUS    Baduin    1  13,37
16 3L/3 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  589  589   78   MUS    Baduin    1  12,37
17 4L/3 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  581  581   78   MUS    Baduin    1  12,37
18 1/1 LN    Infantry Batt.  587  98    68   MUS    Soye      1  15,37
19 2/1 LN    Infantry Batt.  592  99    68   MUS    Soye      1  15,37
20 3/1 LN    Infantry Batt.  587  98    68   MUS    Soye      1  15,37
21 1/2 LN    Infantry Batt.  593  99    68   MUS    Soye      1  15,36
22 2/2 LN    Infantry Batt.  585  98    68   MUS    Soye      1  15,36
23 3/2 LN    Infantry Batt.  587  98    68   MUS    Soye      1  15,36
24 1/92 LN   Infantry Batt.  553  92    68   MUS    Gauthier  1  21,37
25 2/92 LN   Infantry Batt.  495  83    68   MUS    Gauthier  1  21,37
26 1/93 LN   Infantry Batt.  471  79    68   MUS    Gauthier  1  23,33
27 2/93 LN   Infantry Batt.  472  79    68   MUS    Gauthier  1  23,33                                  
28 1/100 LN  Infantry Batt.  423  71    68   MUS    Jamin     1  23,31
29 2/100 LN  Infantry Batt.  424  71    68   MUS    Jamin     1  23,31
30 3/100 LN  Infantry Batt.  246  41    68   MUS    Jamin     1  23,31
31 1L/4 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  533  533   78   MUS    Jamin     1  21,36
32 2L/4 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  536  536   78   MUS    Jamin     1  21,36
33 3L/4 LT   Lt. Inf. Batt.  535  535   78   MUS    Jamin     1  21,36
34 1 LT CH   Lt. Cav. Reg.   485   -    68   SBR    Hubert    1  27,36
35 6 LT CH   Lt. Cav. Reg.   560   -    68   SBR    Hubert    1  27,36
36 5 LN LA   Lancer Reg.     412   -    68   SBR    Wathier   1  28,36
37 6 LN LA   Lancer Reg.     381   -    68   SBR    Wathier   1  28,36
38 2 LN DR   Cavalry Reg.    585   -    78   SBR    Piquet   10  18,37
39 7 LN DR   Cavalry Reg.    516   -    78   SBR    Piquet   10  18,37
40 8 HV CU   Cuirassier Reg. 425   -    88   SBR    Guiton    1  23,36
41 11 HV CU  Cuirassier Reg. 325   -    88   SBR    Guiton    1  23,36
42 G GD LA   Gd. Lancer Reg. 880   -    98   SBR    Lefebvre  5  18,37
43 5 Div FT  Artillery Batt. 128   8    78   6G     -         1  27,33
44 6 Div FT  Artillery Batt. 128   8    78   6/5    -         1  14,37
45 9 Div FT  Artillery Batt. 128   8    78   6G     -         1  25,32
46 2 Cav HS  Horse Art. Batt  96   6    78   6G     -         1  27,37
47 IICorpsFT Corps Art. Batt 128   8    78   12/6   -         1  20,37


Allied Order of Battle
Unit Unit        Type/Size       Men  Guns/ Eff  Wpn  Leader   Turn  X,Y
#    Name                             Skirm
90  1L/27 NE JG  Dutch Jg. Batt.  203    203 68  MUS  Wellington   1  22,22
91  2L/27 NE JG  Dutch Jg. Batt.  202    202 68  MUS  Wellington   1  24,22
92  3L/27 NE JG  Dutch Jg. Batt.  202    202 68  MUS  Wellington   1  26,22
93  4L/27 NE JG  Dutch Jg. Batt.  202    202 68  MUS  Wellington   1  33,26
94  1/19/5 RI    Rifles Battalion 197    197 88  RFL  Wellington   1  29,15
95  2/19/5 RI    Rifles Battalion 196    196 88  RFL  Wellington   1  28,15
96  3/19/5 RI    Rifles Battalion 196    196 88  RFL  Wellington   1  27,15
97  2L/1 GD      Infantry Batt.   1021  1021 98  MUS  Maitland     8   4,0
98  3L/1 GD      Infantry Batt.   1066  1066 98  MUS  Maitland     8   4,0
99  2L/2 GD      Infantry Batt.   1044  1044 98  MUS  Byng         8   4,0
100 3L/2 GD      Infantry Batt.   1104  1104 98  MUS  Byng         8   4,0
101 2/30 LN      Infantry Batt.   657    66  68  MUS  Halkett      6   4,0
102 33 LN        Infantry Batt.   603    60  68  MUS  Halkett      6   4,0
103 2/69 LN      Infantry Batt.   558    56  68  MUS  Halkett      6   4,0
104 2/73 LN      Infantry Batt.   603    60  68  MUS  Halkett      6   4,0
105 BremenHA LN  Hann Inf. Batt.  552    -   58  MUS  Kielmansegge 6   4,0
106 VerdenHA LN  Hann Inf. Batt.  604    -   58  MUS  Kielmansegge 6   4,0
107 York HA LN   Hann Inf. Batt.  647    -   58  MUS  Kielmansegge 6   4,0
108 LunebergHALT Hann Inf. Batt.  635   635  78  MUS  Kielmansegge 6   4,0
109 GrubenHA LN  Hann Inf. Batt.  661    -   58  MUS  Kielmansegge 6   4,0
110 Corps HA JG  Hann Jg. Batt.   340   340  78  MUS  Kielmansegge 6   4,0
111 7 NE LN      Dutch Inf. Batt. 701   116  48  MUS  Bylandt      1  12,11
112 5 NE MI      Dutch Mil. Batt. 482    -   38  MUS  Bylandt      1  19,22
113 7 NE MI      Dutch Mil. Batt. 675    -   38  MUS  Bylandt      1  15,22
114 8 NE MI      Dutch Mil. Batt. 56     -   38  MUS  Bylandt      1   7,24
115 1/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Batt. 903   151  48  MUS  Saxe-Weimar  1   9,22
116 2/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Batt. 903   151  48  MUS  Saxe-Weimar  1  18,10
117 3/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Batt. 903   151  48  MUS  Saxe-Weimar  1  11,21
118 1/OR NE LN   Dutch Inf. Batt. 795   133  48  MUS  Saxe-Weimar  1   4,24
119 2/OR NE LN   Dutch Inf. Batt. 796   133  48  MUS  Saxe-Weimar  1  20,10
120 1/28 LN      Infantry Batt.   594    50  68  MUS  Kempt        1  19,6
121 1/32 LN      Infantry Batt.   712    71  68  MUS  Kempt        1  19,7
122 1/79 HI      Highland Batt.   749    75  78  MUS  Kempt        1  19,8
123 3/1 LN       Infantry Batt.   648    65  68  MUS  Pack         1  19,5
124 1/42 HI      Highland Batt.   561    56  78  MUS  Pack         1  19,3
125 2/44 LN      Infantry Batt.   485    49  68  MUS  Pack         1  19,4
126 1/92 HI      Highland Batt.   629    63  78  MUS  Pack         1  19,2
127 VerdonHA LW  Hann. Lw. Batt.  661    -   38  MUS  Best         1  17,0
128 LunebrgHA LW Hann. Lw. Batt.  664    -   38  MUS  Best         1  17,0
129 OsterdeHA LW Hann. Lw. Batt.  717    -   38  MUS  Best         1  18,1
130 MundenHA LW  Hann. Lw. Batt.  700    -   38  MUS  Best         1  18,1
131 1/BW HU      Lt. Cav. Reg.    690    -   48  SBR  VonCramm     3  21,0
132 2 BW HU      Lt. Cav. Reg.    232    -   48  SBR  VonCramm     3  21,0
133 1/ADV BW GD  Bruns. Gd. Batt. 168   168  58  RFL  Buttler      3  20,0
134 2/ADV BW GD  Bruns. Gd. Batt. 504   504  58  MUS  Buttler      3  20,0
135 BW Guard     Bruns. Gd. Batt. 672   672  58  MUS  Buttler      3  20,0
136 1 L BW LT    Bruns. Lt. Batt. 672   672  58  MUS  Buttler      8  20,0
137 2 L BW LT    Bruns. Lt. Batt. 672   672  58  MUS  Buttler      3  20,0
138 3 L BW LT    Bruns. Lt. Batt. 672   672  58  MUS  Buttler      8  20,0
139 1 BW LN      Bruns. Inf. Batt.672    -   48  MUS  VonSpecht    3  20,0
140 2 BW LN      Bruns. Inf. Batt.672    -   48  MUS  VonSpecht    3  20,0
141 3 BW LN      Bruns. Inf. Batt.672    -   48  MUS  VonSpecht    3  20,0
142 6 NE LW HU   Dutch Cav. Reg.  641    -   48  SBR  Merlen       1  14,3
143 5 NE LW HU   Dutch Cav. Reg.  441    -   48  SBR  Merlen       1  15,3
144 Sandham FT   Artillery Batt.   96    6   78  9G   -            8   9,0
145 Kuhlman HS   Horse Art. Batt.  96    6   78  6G   -            8   4,0
146 Lloyd FT     Artillery Batt.   96    6   78  9G   -            6   5,0
147 Cleeves FT   Artillery Batt.   96    6   78  9/5  -            6   5,0
148 Byleveld FT  Artillery Batt.  128    8   68  6G   -            1  17,24
149 Stievnar FT  Artillery Batt.  128    8   68  6G   -            1  15,22
150 Rogers FT    Artillery Batt.   96    6   78  9/5  -            1  20,0
151 Rettberg FT  Artillery Batt.   96    8   68  9G   -            1  20,1
152 HeinemannHS  Horse Art. Batt. 128    8   68  6G   -           10  20,0
153 Moll FT      Artillery Batt.  128    8   68  6G   -           10  20,0
                                                 
    
    13.4 The Battle of Waterloo

In the summer of 1815, Napoleon found himself again facing
Wellington, this time in Belgium. He intended to divide the
Prussian and British armies and destroy them in detail. On June
16th, Napoleon led half his army into battle against the
Prussians at Ligny while Ney led the other half against the
British at Quatre Bras (see 13.1). Two days later, Napoleon faced
Wellington for the last time.

After the battle of Ligny and Quatre Bras, Napoleon advanced on
the British army which was concentrated at Mont St. Jean,
Belgium. The British had arrayed their forces in a defensive
posture on a slight ridge that overlooked a marshy valley.
Wellington had anchored his right flank on a stone farmhouse
called Chateau de Hougoumont. In the center of his line was
another farmhouse know as La Haye Saint. Both of these farmhouses
had almost been converted into fortresses, giving the British
excellent defensive strongpoints.

On the day of the battle, Napoleon launched a three pronged
attack on the Anglo-Dutch positions. Fearing that any sort of a
flanking assault would bog down in the Valley, Napoleon decided
to concentrate the majority of his forces in an attempt to break
Wellington's center and intended to launch only pinning attacks
on the British left and right wings. The French offensive began
on the British right flank at the Chateau. Held by only 4 light
companies of British guards, the Chateau became the focal point
of vicious, close-range fighting. Desperate attack followed
desperate attack until virtually all of Prince Jerome's division,
and almost half of the rest of Reille's corps, was involved in
the fight. Wellington, seeing the mass of uncommitted French
troops opposite his center, resisted the temptation to reinforce
the Chateau's defenders and chose to save his reserves for the
upcoming frontal assault.

At 1:30 that afternoon, the main French assault began. Under the
cover of an 80 gun barrage, 3 French divisions charged through
the valley and up the slope of the ridge. When the French reached
the crest of the hill, they were met with withering musket fire
at point-blank range. In order to keep his units intact through
the bombardment, Wellington had ordered his men to lie down on
the concealed side of the ridge. So, when the 16,000 men of
D'Erlon's Ist corps reached the top of the rise, they were
confronted with a mass of organized and determined British
regulars. Nevertheless, the French fought fiercely and succeeded
in forcing a hole in the Allied center. Before the French could
exploit this weakness, however, General Picton and a brigade of
his peninsular veterans charged into the fray and stopped the
French breakthrough. D'Erlon could move no further. Wellington,
seeing the French stalled on the ridge, called his cavalry to the
attack. Under Lord Uxbridge's command, Lord Somerset's Household
cavalry and Ponsonby's Union Brigade Charged into the disordered
French and threw them off the ridge. D'Erlon's men were put to
flight and badly mauled by the elite British heavy cavalry.
Spurred on by their success, the British cavalry continued their
chase until they reached the main French lines. Without infantry
support, they were all but annihilated by French artillery and
cavalry counter-charges.

At this point, Marshal Ney was ordered to take La Haye Saint, the
farmhouse that so nicely reinforced the Allied center. He led the
rallied remnants of D'Erlon's Ist corps forward under cover of an
intense bombardment and was repulsed by the dug in defenders.
Ney, thinking that the Allies were ready to crack, called for a
massive cavalry charge. He led forward no less than 5,000
cavalrymen, many of them elite heavy cavalry, in a charge against
the ridge between La Haye Saint and Hougoumont. Upon reaching the
crest, the French were confronted with an awesome spectacle, 20
British squares drawn up on the reverse slope of the hill,
waiting with gleaming bayonets for the gallant French horsemen.
The French cavalry circled the invincible squares, but without
artillery or infantry support the charge was doomed to failure.
The survivors fled back through the valley while Ney tried in
vain to rally them.

After a brief lull in the battle, Ney again formed an assault
force out of the remnants of his cavalry and again charged the
ridge. He was once more repulsed, but this time only barely.
Wellington's troops were becoming weary and he was running out of
reserves. After another lull in the battle, Ney decided to try
again. This time, however, he used a proper combination of
artillery, infantry, and cavalry and he took La Haye Saint.
Despite heavy casualties, the French managed to storm the
farmhouse and the nearby orchard. The British line was about to
crack and Ney could sense it. He called to Napoleon for more
reserves, but due to the Prussian arrival on the French right
flank, there were none left as the Imperial Guard was being
committed against the Prussians. Ney was forced to give up his
gains and pulled back across the valley.

The battle quieted for a short time, during which the Imperial
Guard was placed back in reserve. Wellington brought up the last
of his reserves and prepared for the final onslaught. At 7:00 PM
the Imperial Guard were released to Ney and were ordered to take
the British held positions on the ridge between La Haye Saint and
Hougoumont. The Guard, 11 battalions of the most disciplined and
experienced troops in Europe, marched up the ridge. Upon reaching
the crest, an entire brigade of British troops rose up from a
cornfield and poured withering fire into the French columns. For
the first time, the Guard broke and ran before the enemy. With
the cry of, "La Guard recule!", the French army began to
disintegrate. Wellington seized the moment and counterattacked,
putting the rest of the army to flight. Napoleon's last desperate
gamble for victory had failed, and with it his dreams of
rebuilding his empire.

13.41 ORDERS OF BATTLE

French Order of Battle
Unit Unit      Type/Size        Men  Guns/ Eff   Wpn  Leader  Turn  X,Y
#    Name                            Skirm
0  54/1 LN     Infantry Reg.    962   161  68    MUS  Charlet   1  29,22
1  55/1 LN     Infantry Reg.    1148  192  68    MUS  Charlet   1  30,21
2  28/1 LN     Infantry Reg.    898   150  68    MUS  Bourgeois 1  29,23
3  105/1 LN    Infantry Reg.    983   164  68    MUS  Bourgeois 1  30,22
4  1/13L/2 LT  Lt. Inf. Reg.    938   938  88    MUS  Schmitz   1  25,24
5  2/13L/2 LT  Lt. Inf. Reg.    937   937  88    MUS  Schmitz   1  25,23
6  17/2 LN     Infantry Reg.    1057  177  78    MUS  Schmitz   1  25,24
7  19/2 LN     Infantry Reg.    1032  172  68    MUS  Aulard    1  25,25
8  51/2 LN     Infantry Reg.    1168  195  68    MUS  Aulard    1  27,23
9  21/3 LN     Infantry Reg.    1037  173  68    MUS  Nogues    1  34,20
10 46/3 LN     Infantry Reg.    888   148  68    MUS  Nogues    1  35,20
11 25/3 LN     Infantry Reg.    974   163  68    MUS  Grenier   1  35,21
12 45/3 LN     Infantry Reg.    1003  167  68    MUS  Grenier   1  34,21
13 8/4 LN      Infantry Reg.    983   164  68    MUS  Pegot     1  36,19
14 29/4 LN     Infantry Reg.    1146  191  68    MUS  Pegot     1  37,18
15 85/4 LN     Infantry Reg.    631   106  78    MUS  Brue      1  36,20
16 95/4 LN     Infantry Reg.    1100  184  68    MUS  Brue      1  37,19
17 1/1C LT HU  Lt. Cav. Brig.   804    -   78    SBR  D'Erlon   1  44,15
18 2/1C LT LA  Lt. Cav. Brig.   702    -   68    SBR  D'Erlon   1  45,15
19 3/5 LN      Infantry Reg.    823   138  68    MUS  Husson    1  19,27
20 61/5 LN     Infantry Reg.    538   90   68    MUS  Husson    1  21,26
21 72/5 LN     Infantry Reg.    775   130  68    MUS  Campy     1  19,28
22 108/5 LN    Infantry Reg.    687   115  68    MUS  Campy     1  20,27
23 1/1L/6 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg.    894   894  88    MUS  Bauduin   1   7,29
24 2/1L/6 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg.    894   894  78    MUS  Bauduin   1   8,29
25 1/2L/6 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg.    1071  1071 78    MUS  Bauduin   1   7,30
26 2/2L/6 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg.    1072  1072 78    MUS  Bauduin   1   8,30
27 1/1/6 LN    Infantry Reg.    698   117  68    MUS  Soye      1   5,28
28 2/1/6 LN    Infantry Reg.    697   117  68    MUS  Soye      1   6,28
29 1/2/6 LN    Infantry Reg.    798   133  68    MUS  Soye      1   5,29
30 2/2/6 LN    Infantry Reg.    797   133  68    MUS  Soye      1   6,29
31 92/9 LN     Infantry Reg.    1038  173  68    MUS  Gauthier  1  13,30
32 1/93/9 LN   Infantry Reg.    734   124  68    MUS  Gauthier  1  14,30
33 2/93/9 LN   Infantry Reg.    734   124  68    MUS  Gauthier  1  15,30
34 100/9 LN    Infantry Reg.    1118  187  68    MUS  Jamin     1  13,29
35 1/4L/9 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg.    817   817  78    MUS  Jamin     1  14,29
36 2/4L/9 LT   Lt. Inf. Reg.    817   817  78    MUS  Jamin     1  15,29
37 1/2C LT CH  Lt. Cav. Brig.   1045   -   68    SBR  Reille    1   2,29
38 1/2C LT LA  Lt. Cav. Brig.   817    -   68    SBR  Reille    1   0,29
39 1GR/IG OG   Guard Inf. Reg.  1280  1280 98    MUS  Friant    6  23,31
40 2GR/IG OG   Guard Inf. Reg.  1091  1091 98    MUS  Friant    6  23,31
41 3GR/IG MG   Guard Inf. Reg.  1164  1164 88    MUS  Friant    6  23,31
42 1GR/IG MG   Guard Inf. Reg.  520   520  88    MUS  Friant    6  23,31
43 1CH/IG OG   Guard Inf. Reg.  1307  1307 98    MUS  Morand    6  23,31                                                       
44 2CH/IG OG   Guard Inf. Reg.  1163  1163 98    MUS  Morand    6  23,31
45 1LC/IG CH   Guard Cav. Reg.  1197   -   98    SBR  Lefebvre  1  33,25
46 2LC/IG LA   Guard Cav. Reg.  880    -   98    SBR  Lefebvre  1  33,26
47 1HC/IG GR   Gren. Cav. Reg.  796    -   98    SBR  Drouot    2   9,31
48 2HC/IG ED   Emp. Drg. Reg.   816    -   98    SBR  Drouot    2   9,31
49 1/11C DR    Cavalry Brig.    1110   -   78    SBR  Kellerman 1  15,31
50 2/11C CU    Cuirassier Brig. 691    -   88    SBR  Kellerman 1  16,31
51 1/12C CA    Carabinier Brig. 847    -   78    CRB  Kellerman 1   7,31
52 2/12C CU    Cuirassier Brig. 791    -   88    SBR  Kellerman 1   8,31
53 1/13C CU    Cuirassier Brig. 749    -   88    SBR  Mihaud    1  34,23
54 2/13C CU    Cuirassier Brig. 428    -   88    SBR  Mihaud    1  35,23
55 1/14C CU    Cuirassier Brig. 847    -   88    SBR  Mihaud    1  31,24
56 2/14C CU    Cuirassier Brig. 667    -   88    SBR  Mihaud    1  32,24
57 I FT FI     Corps. Art. Batt.128    -   78    12G   -        1  28,21
58 1 FT FI     Div. Art. Batt.  128   8    78    6G    -        1  29,22
59 2 FT FI     Div. Art. Batt.  128   8    78    6/5   -        1  25,23
60 3 FT FI     Div. Art. Batt.  128   8    78    6G    -        1  34,20
61 4 FT FI     Div. Art. Batt.  128   8    78    6/5   -        1  37,17
62 1C HS FI    Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    78    6/5   -        1  45,16
63 II FT FI    Corps Art. Batt. 128   8    78    12G   -        1  18,27
64 5 FT FI     Div. Art. Batt.  128   8    78    6G    -        1  19,26
65 6 FT FI     Div. Art. Batt.  128   8    78    6G    -        1   7,29
66 9 FT FI     Div. Art. Batt.  128   8    78    6G    -        1  14,30
67 2C HS FI    Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    78    6/5   -        1   1,29
68 11C HS FI   Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    78    6G    -        1  17,31
69 12C HS FI   Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    78    6/5   -        1   6,31
70 13C HS FI   Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    78    6G    -        1  33,23
71 14C HS FI   Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    78    6/5   -        1  33,24
72 VI FT FI    Corps Art. Batt. 128   8    78    12/24 -        1  23,31
73 1/IG FT GD  Guard Art. Batt. 128   8    88    12G   -        3   9,31
74 2/IG FT GD  Guard Art. Batt. 128   8    88    12/24 -        3   9,31
75 3/IG FT GD  Guard Art. Batt. 128   8    88    12G   -        3   9,31
76 4/IG FT GD  Guard Art. Batt. 128   8    88    12/24 -        3   9,31
77 5/IG FT GD  Guard Art. Batt. 128   8    88    6G    -        3  10,31
78 6/IG FT GD  Guard Art. Batt. 128   8    88    6/5   -        3  10,31
79 7/IG FT GD  Guard Art. Batt. 128   8    88    6/5   -        3  10,31
80 8/IG HS GD  Gd. Horse Batt.  96    6    88    6G    -        1  34,25
81 9/IG HS GD  Gd. Horse Batt.  96    6    88    6/5   -        1  31,26
82 10/IG HS GD Gd. Horse Batt.  96    6    88    6G    -        2   9,31
83 11/IG HS GD Gd. Horse Batt.  96    6    88    6/5   -        2   9,31
                                                               
                                                               
Allied Order of Battle
Unit Unit      Type/Size          Men  Guns/  Eff Wpn Leader     Turn  X,Y
#    Name                              Skirm
90 3/CV KG LD     KGL Cav. Brig.  2001   -    68  SBR Wellington   1  14,11
91 4/CV LN LD     Lt. Cav. Brig.  1373   -    78  SBR Wellington   1  38,3
92 5/CV LN HU     Lt. Cav. Brig.  1315   -    78  SBR Wellington   1   7,16
93 6/CV LN HU     Lt. Cav. Brig.  1615   -    78  SBR Wellington   1  42,1
94 7/CV LN HU     Lt. Cav. Brig.  1764   -    58  SBR Wellington   7  18,0
95 1/1/GD         Guard Inf. Reg.  638  638   98  MUS Maitland     1  14,14
96 2/1/GD         Guard Inf. Reg.  672  672   98  MUS Maitland     1  13,15
97 1/2/GD         Guard Inf. Reg.  896  896   98  MUS Byng         1  11,17
98 2/2/GD         Guard Inf. Reg.  939  939   98  MUS Byng         1  12,16
99 1/3/GD         Guard Inf. Reg.  425  425   98  MUS MacDonnell   1   9,22
100  2/3/GD       Guard Inf. Reg.  363  363   98  MUS MacDonnell   1  13,22
101  3/3/GD       Guard Inf. Reg.  271  271   78  RFL MacDonnell   1  12,24
102  4/3/GD       Guard Inf. Reg.  420  420   58  MUS MacDonnell   1   9,25
103  5/3/GD       Guard Inf. Reg.  419  419   58  MUS MacDonnell   1  10,25
104  1/3 LN       Hann, Inf. Reg. 1044   -    58  MUS Keilmansegge 1  19,10
105  2/3 LN       Hann, Inf. Reg.  895   -    58  MUS Keilmansegge 1  20,9
106  3/3 LT       Hann, Inf. Reg.  505  505   78  MUS Keilmansegge 1  19,9
107  4/3 LN       Infantry Reg.   1684  636   68  MUS Ompteda      1  22,10
108  5/3LN KGL    Infantry Reg.    463  463   78  RFL Ompteda      1  22,14
109  6/3 LN       Infantry Reg.   1245  125   68  MUS Halkett      1  17,13
110  7/3 LN       Infantry Reg.   1115  112   68  MUS Halkett      1  18,12
111  1/2 NE MI    Du. Milita Reg. 1573   -    38  MUS Perponcher   1  28,10
112  2/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Reg. 1260  718   58  MUS Perponcher   1  30,9
113  3/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Reg.  835  140   48  MUS Perponcher   1  37,11
114  4/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Reg.  849  142   48  MUS Perponcher   1  40,11
115  5/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Reg.  843  141   48  MUS Perponcher   1  42,11
116  6/2 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Reg.  815  284   48  MUS Perponcher   1  46,12
117  1/3 NE MI    Du. Milita.Reg. 1011   -    38  MUS Chasse      11   0,10
118  2/3 NE MI    Du. Milita. Reg.1001   -    38  MUS Chasse      11   0,10
119  3/3 NE LN    Infantry Reg.   1076  684   58  MUS Chasse      11   0,10
120  4/3 NE MI    Du. Milita. Reg.1224   -    38  MUS Chasse      11   0,10
121  5/3 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Reg. 1095  183   48  MUS Chasse      11   0,10
122  6/3 NE LN    Dutch Inf. Reg. 1262  738   58  MUS Chasse      11   0,10
123  1/2LN KGL    Infantry Reg.   1063  107   68  MUS DuPlat       1   8,12
124  2/2LN KGL    Infantry Reg.   1105  111   68  MUS DuPlat       1   9,12
125  3/2 LT       Lt. Inf. Reg,   1175 1175   78  MUS Adam         1   9,10
126  4/2 LT       Lt. Inf. Reg,    939  939   78  MUS Adam         1   8,10
127  5/2 RI       Rifles Regiment  888  888   88  RFL Adam         1   8,9
128  6/2 LW       Hann. Ldw. Reg. 1288   -    38  MUS Halkett      7   0,10
129  7/2 LW       Hann. Ldw. Reg. 1253   -    38  MUS Halkett      7   0,10
130  1/4 LN       Infantry Reg.    649   65   68  MUS Mitchell     1   6,14
131  2/4 LT       Lt. Inf. Reg.   1381  709   78  MUS Mitchell     1   8,16
132  1/5 RI       Rifles Regiment  418  418   88  RFL Kempt        1   24,10
133  2/5 HI       Highland Reg.    483   48   78  MUS Kempt        1   24,9
134  3/5 LN       Infantry Reg.   1089  109   68  MUS Kempt        1   25,9
135  4/5 HI       Highland Reg.    798   80   78  MUS Pack         1   29,7
136  5/5 LN       Infantry Reg.    967   97   68  MUS Pack         1   28,7
137  6/5 LW       Hann. Ldw. Reg. 1289   -    38  MUS Best         1   33,7
138  7/5 LW       Hann. Ldw. Reg. 1380   -    38  MUS Best         1   34,7
139  8/5 LW       Hann. Ldw. Reg. 1329   -    38  MUS Vincke       1   36,6
140  9/5 LW       Hann. Ldw. Reg. 1275   -    38  MUS Vincke       1   37,6
141  1/6 LN       Infantry Reg.   1443  145   68  MUS Lambert      7   19,0
142  2/6 LN       Infantry Reg.    866   87   68  MUS Lambert      7   19,0
143  GD/1/BW      Bruns. Gd. Reg. 1140 1140   68  MUS Brunswick    7   18,0
144  1/1/BW LT    Bruns. Lt. Reg.  685  685   58  MUS Brunswick    7   18,0
145  2/1/BW LT    Bruns. Lt. Reg.  591  591   58  MUS Brunswick    7   18,0
146  3/1/BW LT    Bruns. Lt. Reg.  691  691   58  MUS Brunswick    7   18,0
147  1/2/BW LN    Bruns. Ln. Reg.  556   -    48  MUS Brunswick    7   18,0
148  2/2/BW LN    Bruns. Ln. Reg.  547   -    48  MUS Brunswick    7   18,0
149  3/2/BW LN    Bruns. Ln. Reg.  631   -    48  MUS Brunswick    7   18,0
150  1/NAS NE LN  Dutch Inf.Reg.  1894  316   48  MUS Kruse        1   16,8
151  2/NAS NE LN  Dutch Inf.Reg.   947   -    38  MUS Kruse        1   17,8
152  1/CV LN DR   Cavalry Brig.   1416   -    98  SBR Uxbridge     1   20,7
153  2/CV LN DR   Cavalry Brig.   1369   -    88  SBR Uxbridge     1   24,6
154  1/NECVLNLA   Lt, Cav.Brig.   1237   -    58  SBR Collaert     1   19,5
155  2/NECVLN LD  Lt, Cav.Brig.   1086   -    48  SBR Collaert     7   19,0
156  3/NECVLNHU   Lt, Cav. Brig.   949   -    48  SBR Collaert     1   17,5
157  1/GD FT FI   Gd. Art. Batt.   96    6    78  9/5   -          1   9,17
158  2/GD HS      Gd. Art. Batt.   96    6    78  9G    -          1   15,14
159  1/3ArtFT FI  Artillery Batt.  96    6    78  9G    -          1   19,12
160  2/3ArtFT FI  Artillery Batt.  96    6    78  9/5   -          1   20,11
161  1/2ArtFT FI  Artillery Batt.  96    6    78  9G    -          1   9,11
162  2/2ArtHS     Artillery Batt.  96    6    78  9/5   -          1   6,12
163  4 ArtHA FT   Hann Art. Batt.  96    6    68  9G    -          1   35,7
164  1/5ArtFT FI  Artillery Batt.  96    6    78  9G    -          1   25,11
165  2/5ArtHA FT FI Hann Art.Batt. 96    6    68  6/5   -          1   19,0
166  6 Art FT FI  Artillery Batt.  96    6    78  9G    -          7   19,0
167  1/BW FT FI   Bruns.Art.Batt.  128   8    58  6G    -          7   13,3
168  2/BW HS      Bruns. Art. Batt.128   8    58  6G    -          7   14,3
169  2NE FT FI    Dutch Art. Batt. 160  10    58  6G    -          1   29,9
170  1/3NE FT HS  Dutch Art.Batt.  128   8    58  6G    -         11   0,10
171  2/3NE FT FI  Dutch Art.Batt.  128   8    58  6G    -         11   0,10
172  NECV HS      Dutch Art. Batt. 128   8    58  6G    -          1   18,5
173  1/RES HS     Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    88  9G    -          1   21,10
174  2/RES HS     Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    88  6G    -          1   16,2
175  1RHA HS      Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    88  H5.5  -          1   11,13
176  2RHA HS      Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    88  6G    -          1   11,12
177  3RHA HS      Horse Art. Batt. 96    6    88  6/5   -          1   43,1
178  4RHA HS      Horse Art. Batt. 80    5    88  6G    -          1   23,7
179  5RHA HS      Horse Art. Batt. 192  12    88  9/5   -          1   18,8
                                                        



                           CREDITS

                              

                         Game Design
                        Chuck Kroegel
                              
                      Game Programming
                        David Landrey
                              
                      Game Development
Chuck Kroegel, David Landrey, Joel Billings & Graeme Bayless
                              
                            Rules
               Graeme Bayless & Victor Penman
                              
                    Historical Scenarios
         Dick Vohlers, Joel Billings & Chuck Kroegel
                              
          Customized Disk Operation System (Apple)
                      Roland Gustafsson
                              
                         Playtesters
Graeme Bayless, Joel Billings, James Kucera, Dave Shelley, Robert
Daly, John Bruning, David Heath, Richard Hooks, Mike Musser,
                        Gunter Meyer,
            Bill Barr, Russ Smith & Cyrus Harris
                              
                 Special Historical Research
                         Mike Musser
                              
                  Special Historical Notes
                        John Bruning
                              
                    Art & Graphic Design
    Louis Saekow Design: David Boudreau & Peter Gascoyne
                              
                     Desktop Publishing
               David Boudreau & Peter Gascoyne
                              
                          Printing
              A & a Printers and Lithographers
                              
            (c) 1988 Strategic Simulations, Inc.

