[SPACE I - manual, and text from the back-cover of the software packaging.]

Interactive Fantasies

SPACE

(c) 1979 Steven W. Pederson and Sherwin A. Steffin

     This unique epic game series provides a multi-faceted simulation of
human life in an interstellar environment. It is designed to represent many
of the decisions which would be faced by a member of interstellar society
interacting with his complex and demanding environment. Because of the
complexity and length of the programs, it is likely that play will extend
over several sessions. The six games comprising the series each generate
text files which maintain a permanent record of the life of each character
in the game.

For Apple II and II-plus computers.
Requires 48k RAM and Disk Drive.

Developed exclusively by:

Edu-Ware Services, Inc.
28035 Dorothy Drive
P.O.Box 22222
Agoura, CA 91301
(213) 706-0661

(c) Copyright 1979. All Rights Reserved.

Apple is the trademark of Apple Computer, Inc.






















Introduction
============

     SPACE, the authors believe, is something rather unique to the field of
Micro-Computers. What makes it unique? Here are some of the differences
between SPACE, and many of the other fine games you have had an opportunity
to play:

1. SPACE is a multi scenario game.

     Predicated on a projection of real life situations in a time in the
far distant future, it develops, the authors believe, some plausible
situations in which the user might conceivably find him/herself. To the
degree allowed by the capabilities of the computer, and the skills of the
authors, we have endeavored to make each of the scenarios contingent upon
potentially real variations in human skills, and the impact of situations
over which we have little knowledge, and even less control.

2. The results of later games are contingent on earlier games.

     Put another way, our past comes back to haunt us in unexpected ways.
While not every variable impacts on every game, all variables come into
play in one or more of the games. Variable development is cumulative
throughout play of the games.

3. Risk/Benefit is part of every game.

     Just as in real life, we assess the decisions we make based upon our
judgement of the risks and the benefits, so too, is this the case with each
of the SPACE games. Players have a number of options which may be judged
for both their positive values, and the risks they entail.

4. Randomness is a part of every move.

     While most of us believe that we have control over our own destinies,
there are a few among us who assert that they have total control over their
lives. Illness, accident, loss of income, are all a part of our lives over
which we have little, if any, control. And, as this is the case in real
life, so too, is randomness a determinant in each of the games of SPACE.

5. Information is deliberately imprecise.

     While it would certainly be possible to describe all of the games'
possible permutations, we have chosen to leave much of this discovery to
the player. After all, none of us have perfect information on which to base
real life decisions, and yet we nonetheless are required to make them each
day of our lives. The authors sought to replicate this condition within
each of the games.

6. Winning is in the eyes of the player.

     In most games with which we are familiar, the goals of the game are
explicit. Other than the goal of simply staying alive, other goals are set
individually by the player; for some the gathering of wealth is central to
the way the game is played; to others, showing their skills as warriors
will be the reason for playing to a conclusion. Thoughtful construction of
various characters, and their control throughout the games, as well as the
sequence of games selected, will serve to enhance the achievement of
individual goals.

7. Exit points exist for some of the games.

     Typically, a game has to be finished before the computer is powered
down for the night. This is not the case with the SPACE series. Since some
game outcomes are committed to text file, some of the games allow players
to resume where they left off.


Characters and Scenarios
========================

     The SPACE series relies on the creation of a number of characters by
the player, which are then played through each of the scenarios, or games.
Thus, the human player creates one or more characters which represent him
throughout play. Each character created has a set of attributes. These
attributes, over which the human player has some control, can be divided
into several broad categories:

1. Basic Attributes

     All of us are born with, or grow into certain attributes which can
serve to quantitatively describe our characteristics. Strength, endurance,
dexterity, IQ, social status, and education all may be explicitly
described. Yet in most cases are essentially beyond our direct control.

2. Physical and Psychological Attributes

     Having been endowed with some hereditary traits, our development
throughout our lives depends upon both genetic makeup, and environmental
setting. As is the case in real life, players have the opportunity to make
some modifications in the physical, and psychological characteristics of
their characters, attempting to maximize the characters' attributes for
most effective coping with the requirements of the games in which they are
participants.

3. Skill Development

     During their stay in the service, characters are given the opportunity
to develop specific skills. Some of these are applicable only in context of
military life while others are applied in civilian occupations. Players
should give close attention to the skills developed for their characters,
since these will impact on the character's performance within the games.

4. Economic Factors

     While one measure of the human condition is change, it also seems
apparent that a constant of human society is out reliance on an economic
framework to oil the societal machine. To the best of the authors' beliefs
this condition will prevail into the distant future of man's spread
throughout the galaxy. The acquisition of money, and its use is thus seen
in each of the games, and is central in some.

5. Interpreting Attribute, Skill, and Economic Variables

A. Attributes are valued from 2 to 12. A "2" is indicative of an almost
total absence of the quality being rated. A "12" implies the maximum
possible for the attribute. An intelligence of "6" translates to an IQ of
100. Each increment of intelligence by 1 equals 10 IQ points with the
Standard Deviation of 1.5.

B. There are 6 physical health variables which are calculated from other
factors within the program. Narrative statements accompany each of these
numeric quantities, which range from 1 (pathology of that system) to 4
(system in good health).

C. Personality attributes are calculated by the program, and are displayed
as narrative statements within the program. These attributes have both
direct and hidden effects within all of the programs. They are only
indirectly modifiable by the player.

D. Skill Ratings. On initial entry, characters are seen as not possessing
any skills. All skills at entry are rated as a "0". A rating of "1" implies
initial training having been completed. A "2" puts the character at
readiness to instruct others in the skill. A "3" is a consultant to
instructors, while a "4" and above is a Master at that skill.

E. Financial Acquisitions. With the shift from an Earth-bound, to a
galaxy-wide culture, money is now standardized to the Galactic Credit (GCR)
being the normal unit of exchange. Players are cautioned not to attempt to
equate the values of this form of exchange with the current U.S. Dollar,
which totally collapsed in the Great Depression of 1996.

F. Age. Characters initiate play at age 18. During various games, age
increments a year at a time. Players should be aware that the average life
span has been extended to well over 100 years, calculated Earth Standard.
Rejuvenation after extensive aging and cloning after death are well
established, if expensive, life extension methods.


Scenario Notes
==============


CHARACTERS

     Every Earth citizen, having reached age 18, faces a term of service in
one of the Galactic Federation's Military Services. Citizens may attempt to
enlist in the service of their choice, or failing that, will be drafted to
that service having need for their abilities.

     As the player develops the character throughout this game, there are
many options for having a whole group of characters with different
characteristics which best suit them for their roles in later games.

     Many players of epoch games report that they become attached to
characters they have created, even when those characters are somewhat
inadequate for the tasks that face them. The authors have made provision
for a wide range of attributes being carried forward by characters into the
other games, but truly inadequate characters will be killed by the computer
before much time is spent on developing them.

     Since the rigors of combat training do pose real risks, players should
be aware that continual exposure of the character to these risks may result
in death or disabling injury to the character that the player has labored
long to build.

     At the end of this game, each character is committed to a permanent,
locked, essentially unmodifiable (by the player), text file. This file is
the basis for the action of the character throughout the rest of the games.
File access is by inputting the name of the character when prompted.


FIRST BLOOD

     Having faced the rigors of training, the character now faces a real
test of his/her abilities to survive in real world, fight-to-the-death
combat. The player has a choice of one of three options for the conduct of
this game:

1. Solitaire

     In this mode, the player selects any two of the characters, and plays
them, one against the other. One of the characters will eventually die (and
be subsequently from the text file), while the winning character recovers
the money, and possessions of the now departed loser. Any two characters
may be played, with the exception of 'Adversary' who is the computer's own
character.

2. Two Player Game

     Any two players may participate, selecting any two characters that are
available. A soon to be released version of this option will allow for play
to be conducted, in this mode, via modem, over phone lines.

3. Player -vs- 'Adversary'

     When this option is selected the player has either a limited number of
characters at his disposal, or feels confident that he can destroy the
mighty computer generated 'Adversary,' and thus capture all of its
possessions. Players should be aware that 'Adversary' is a mighty
gladiator, and that only the fittest, and the brightest characters can hope
to survive this encounter. While all of 'Adversary' material possessions,
and money accrue to the winner, the character itself is immediately cloned
after being killed, and is thus immortal.

     As is the case with all of the games, there is no specific requirement
that this game be played in any pre-determined sequence. The risks to a
character are very high, since only 1 in 2 will survive, with indeterminant
benefit. These are a function of the money carried by the losing character,
his possessions, (which can be very large), and some intangibles which are
only discoverable during play of the game.


DEFEND

     A character is assigned as the Administrator on a world in a
star-system long distant from the Earth. Since the world is many light
years from home, dependent families are housed, and live out their lives on
the planet. The calm of day to day life on the planet is suddenly ended
with the detection of hostile invaders, who are soon to attack and plunder
the colony.

     The Administrator is faced with making one of four basic decisions.

1. To mobilize the colony for evacuation.

     This decision, while it is relatively low in risk and would serve to
maximize the potential for all to escape unharmed, also leaves the entire
investment in the planet in the hands of the invaders - no small cost to
pay for safety.

2. To mobilize the base to fight the invaders.

     This choice is fraught with risk; many may die, including innocent
children. From the perspective of the Federation, this is the best choice,
for which they will well reward the Administrator, should he be successful
in his efforts.

3. Surrender to the invaders.

     If this option is adopted by the Administrator, he has the opportunity
to minimize risks to himself, while accepting indeterminant benefits in
terms of job continuation with a new employer. Players may assess the costs
in terms of ethics, making whatever appear to be appropriate judgements.
(After all, who will ever know? - Or will they!)

4. Personal escape.

     The Administrator simply leaves the colony to the mercy (sic!) of the
invaders. Such behavior, of course, will evoke revulsion in the society of
the Federation, and be held in contempt, but then, of course, the survival
of the character is at stake. This can be an interesting option!

Console Display
---------------

     Play of the game begins with a display of the current status of the
     colony, which is at peace. Suddenly, without any warning, attackers are
detected. During the entire attack, display changes are very rapid, and
require real time, high pressure decisions to be made by the player,
through his character. As soon as the player can make a judgement about the
status of the situation, he should immediately go into the Command Mode
which allows changes in the capabilities of the colony to respond to the
invaders.

Console Data
------------

     The console data provides the player with a basis to make appropriate
decisions. It consists of:

1. Sensors - used by the base to detect the presence of the attackers,
their strength, as well as providing input data relative to the status of
the rest of the data provided by the console. In the event the sensors are
destroyed, the Administrator is "flying blind," in making good judgements
about further actions to take.

2. Defenses - report on the status of the defensive screens, force shields,
etc. available to protect the base from attack.

3. Starport - provides information about the ability of the starport
facilities to expedite an evacuation, should this option be elected.

4. Residences and Population - the status of the physical condition of the
population housing is shown, as well as the number of colonists remaining
alive at the end of each attack.

5. Control Center - it is from this point that all control of the choices,
and actions are distributed to various weapons systems, defenses, etc. If
the Control Center is destroyed, an automatic switchover to secondary
computer takes place. This computer manages the remaining conduct of the
battle, but the Administrator no longer can issue commands.

     In the event that both residences, and Control Center are destroyed,
the Administrator is presumed dead, since he could only have been in one of
those two locations during the attack. The program will execute the Death
and Delete routine for the character.

6. Status/Mode - tells the current status of the colony, and the mode in
which the colony is responding.

7. Energy Bank - provides the energy required for all of the options,
including evacuation. If disabled, no additional energy is produced, and
after the current energy is expended, the colony is helpless.

8. Hits and Misses - are shown using the flash mode over a stricken
facility for a hit, and a cross for a miss.

9. Action Conditions

A. Green - normal standard operating procedure.
B. Yellow - minimal damage done by attack.
C. Red - severe damage done to installation, imminent danger of
   disablement.
D. Blue - facility is destroyed.

Operating Commands
------------------

     After entering the Command Mode, the player has six command options at
his disposal:

1. EV - Change evacuation status.
2. DS - Change energy defensive shields.
3. WE - Change energy to offensive weapons.
4. SX - Surrender.
5. PE - Attempt personal escape.
6. NN - No command - return to display.

Some General Considerations in Playing Defend
---------------------------------------------

     While randomness is certainly a part of this game, as it is in all of
the SPACE series, players should be aware that character attributes have a
profound effect on the outcome of the game. This is true to a far larger
extent than is the randomness within the game. Thus players should have
intimate knowledge of their characters, before selecting one of them for
this demanding game!


HIGH FINANCE

     This fast moving and demanding game of financial manipulation extends
the familiar mechanism of stock sales to the far reaches of the galaxy.
Eleven stocks are provided in portfolio form to the player. Extensive
prompting is available for the conduct of transactions, and the
interpretation of the results. As in any financial endeavor, the object of
the game is to maximize the character's net worth, through rational
economic decision making.

     The scenario presumes galaxy-wide investment opportunities for the
character who has amassed major levels of wealth during his adventures in
earlier games. While this game may be selected at any time during the
course of play, players are advised that minimum investment requirements
will, in all likelihood, require them to play their characters through some
of the more lucrative games to acquire the wealth required.

     After callup of the game, the player is presented with three
categories of selections available to him.

1. Stock ticker listing for all available stocks.
2. Confidential portfolio information.
3. Proceeds to the next investment quarter, executes transactions, and
   provides extra-market data.

     Transactions in the game are always initiated from the stock ticker
routine. These include buying and selling of stocks, and ending the game,
with the payoff of all loans.

     Player net worth, Loan obligation, and Cash on Hand are all available
to the player during the viewing of the display.

     The confidential portfolio display is provided as in-depth
informational review to help the player to assess the relative merits of
each of the stocks, and the risks he may be assuming in undertaking the
purchase of these securities.

     When the "Lock in of Investments" routine is called, a variety of
information is provided to the player, relative to stock splits, as well as
galactic news effecting the financial community. (For those so inclined,
this service might be considered the "Wall Street Journal of Space.")

     While the program does not put the same kind of real time pressures on
the player as do games like Defend, and in the normal course of events, the
character is not required to demonstrate his combat prowess, there are
nonetheless real risks to the character. He may, for example, be subject to
illness, and death during the game. Moreover, there are probabilities that
the character can be bankrupted by inappropriate investment of the player.

     Yet, the potentials for massive acquisition of wealth are indeed
there, and this game is capable of providing much in acquisitive
satisfaction to the player with money-making inclinations.


EXPLORE

     Perhaps the measure of man is his consistent need to seek out new
challenges for himself, in the acquisition of goods and services, but even
beyond that that, in the search for the ever receding siren call of the
frontier. Explore is the authors' attempt to meet that need. It presumes an
exploration force, seeking new worlds to exploit for valuable minerals.
Players receive limited information about conditions as they exist on three
worlds, which are generated by the computer. Based on this information, the
player sends his character on an exploration trip to the planet which
appears to have the best risk/benefit mix, given the planetary parameters,
and the attributes of the character, which the player believes are most
likely to be of importance in achieving survival, and success of the
mission.

     Play begins with the presentation of the three planets for
consideration by the player. As indicated above, the data is incomplete,
relative to each planet, but the player must choose, given the information
that is available. Such factors as the presence or absence of animal life,
climate, the nature of the population living on the planet, and the
availability of fuel, and the probability of finding minerals are all part
of the data the player must sift through.

     Having landed on the planet, players determine the amount of fuel
supply they will expend for the acquisition of minerals, and the mode they
will employ to leave the planet. Players must be mindful that if fuel
supplies drop below 50, the exploration party is marooned on the planet,
either until rescue arrives, or until new fuel sources are found.


TRADER

     After all is said and done the motivation for man moving out to space
has been, and the authors believe will continue to be, the motivation for
wealth and power. After minerals, drugs, technology, and all the other
trappings of civilization have been identified, and exploited, there still
is the need to move those goods and services from one place to the other.
This, the second oldest profession in the galaxy is what this game is all
about.

     Characters, have, by this point in their careers moved freely through
a number of professions. They have tested their skills in combat; they have
had the chance to administer and defend an important colony far from home;
some have enjoyed the rigors, and the opportunities inherent in the
exploration of new worlds, waiting for exploitation, and plunder. Now comes
the opportunity for the player to create the Horatio Alger myth of old --
the opportunity to be a trader in the vast emptiness of the shipping lanes
of space.

     The game presumes the need for the acquisition of a ship, with all
that this entails. Financing, acquiring, and preparing the ship are
demanding tasks of the player and his by now, well familiar character
surrogate.

     Once having acquired the ship, the character must hire a crew, and, on
the planet Xenon-12, buy weapons, and electronic equipment for later sale.
At the same time, he tries to fill the passenger space of his ship with the
best mix of passengers to maximize his economic gains from the difficult
passage.

     Passenger accommodations must be negotiated for the ship, while in
flight, to provide the best mix of high passage and low passage passengers.
High passage passengers are those with stateroom facilities on board ship.
Low passage passengers are placed in cyrogenic containers for the length of
the journey.

     During the month long journey through space, the character lives (or
in some cases dies) through many experiences, but because of the technology
employed, he is essentially unable to control the events which take place.

     Once having landed on the planet Y4732A, the Trader sells his goods,
pays off the crew, and has the opportunity, if he wishes, to buy drugs and
valuable crystals for use as raw materials by the electronics industry. It
should be noted that the two planets exist in a symbiotic relationship to
one another. Xenon-12 is the high technology, mineral poor planet, while
Y732A is a low technology, raw material rich planet.

     The play of the game is rich with prompts, and unacceptable inputs are
clearly rejected by the computer.


Getting Into SPACE
==================

     For all of its complexity, SPACE is an extraordinarily easy game to
initiate. To play simply boot the game disk and follow the screen prompts
which appear in inverse.

     There are a couple of logistical facts which you should know:

1. In order to accommodate players without Applesoft ROM cards or II+
computers, disk Applesoft is included with the SPACE game. This leaves room
remaining for only a couple of character files. Those who do not need the
diskette Applesoft should delete it from the disk.

2. Because of the limited space for character storage, players will find it
advantageous to store their many characters on a separate diskette. (This
is a must for those without the ROM.)

3. Using a separate disk for character files is fairly straightforward if
these procedures are used. In Characters, leave the game disk in the drive
until the character is "ready to enter civilian life". Then insert the
character file disk. (Characters is actually four games chained together.)
In each of the other scenarios, run the game from the game disk until you
are asked to input the character's name. At this point, insert the
character disk.

4. In First Blood, both characters must be on the same disk.


















[Back-cover]

SPACE

     Venture into the far distant future...A strangely altered society
populates this galactic expanse, and penetrates to the dim edges of the
Universe. SPACE, an Interactive Fantasy, takes you there.

     This unique system provides multi-faceted simulations of human life in
an interstellar environment, both perilous and baffling.

     The player first constructs several characters, giving each a distinct
physical and psychological make-up. The computer will display personality
traits as narrative, while skills and physiology are scaled numerically.
The player generates a permanent, locked text file which forms the locus of
a character's actions throughout the scenarios. Careful selection of game
sequence and characters will prove rewarding. But remember, randomness is a
prime determinant. You may see myriad options before you, but can you
assess the benefits and risks wisely?

     Six intricate scenarios comprise SPACE:

CHARACTERS

FIRST BLOOD - Now the Game is life-and-death.

DEFEND - On a small planet in a distant solar system, a character
administrates a colony...Suddenly, it is plundered. Do you evacuate,
mobilize, surrender, or abandon the citizens?

TRADER - Recreate the Horatio Alger myth...exploit the vast emptiness of
the galaxy's shipping lanes. EXPLORE - On the edge of an ever receding
frontier, a lone character searches out valuable mineral deposits.

HIGH FINANCE - Galaxy-wide investment opportunities are available for the
character who has amassed great wealth during earlier escapades. Your
computer supplies a portfolio. Manipulate to your heart's content.

     Enjoy. This system's complexity allows play to extend over several
sessions.

