PRAYERS TO UFTHU, GOD OF WAR

Ufthu, God of War, Tongue of Iron, Qanak Dasoro, Priest fo the
Scarlet Assassins, Dragon Lord, Master of teh Abyss, is the most
powerful of the gods. Proud in his strength, unpredictable in his
weakness. Ufthu is a wary god, careful in his dealings with
mortals, but his greatest weakness is vanity. Take this warning,
but know that Ufthu, Silent Huntsman, will heed the calls of one
who serves him truly. These Prayers are yours.


RALKOR		Divine Arrow

Ufthu, O bow of the Stars,
Hear this low voice,
Send down your bolt,
Against the one who stands against you.

KARNH		Hammer of Shattering

Ufthu, Sword of the Night, Hammer,
Defned your lowly subject,
Smite those who stand near your servant,
And damn them to the darkness.

DROM		Strength to the Sword Arm

Ufthu, Soldier of Misfortune,
Hear your humble Priest,
Send your strength to those on earth,
Who bear steel against the dark foes.

IDRIS		Peacful Bones

Ufthu, Supreme Lord of Corruption,
Through this ring I call your divine essence,
Take back these lifeless bodies that assail us,
That struggle against death's mortal coil.

THOL		Mist of Confusion

Ufthu, Jewel of the Desert,
I call on your breath to come from the ether,
To slow your enemy,
To steal from them their skills.





PRAYERS TO DRUTHO, GOD OF THE UNDERWORLD

Drutho, God of the Underworld, Goddess of Stealth, Seducer of
the Earth Spirits, Queen of Corruption, Ethereal Hermaphrodite,
Demon Lover, Lord of the Portals, the youngest of the godes, hides
far from the light of the older gods. Within the lowermost caverns
of Lithane, Temple of Darkness, Drutho's Priests toil to supplicate
their god. The work of these shaven Priests has made Drutho
grants these Prayers to all who recognize his/her dominion in the
dark kingdoms.


UMESH		Knowledge Without Wisdom

Drutho, O Worm of the Deep,
Call forth the meaning of these words;
Pass your darkest light over their script,
That they will yield their meaning to me.

HOYAMOQ		The Temple Passage

Drutho, Gol Draqur, moraseth kanu,
Open this way for your servants;
Having discovered the portal you had hidden,
We now must pass through.

TAPU		Sacred Passage

Drutho, Dark One, hear this Prayer.
Weave your magic around our passage,
That we may walk past traps,
That we may pass danger in safety.

BYNDU		Drawing Together

Ah, Drutho, grant me the power;
Make fast the beckoning sign,
To draw forth opponents unto my presence,
And bind them beside me, to stay as I will.

MORPETH		Quiet Walking

Drutho, Mistress of Stealth,
Bind our feet with soft wilken cloth,
Silence our voices and muffle our steps,
That we may walk without calling our death.

BELAMOQ		Translucent Passage

Drutho, Lord of the Portals, this way resists
Our most urgent attempts,
Take its outline, hinge and bolt,
And dissolve its stubborn form into ether.




PRAYERS TO GOLTHUR, GOD OF THE PHYSICAL SELF

Golthur, Oldest of the Gods, Rulemaster, Keeper of Souls, Lamp of
the Heavens, Carrier of Strength, Maker of the Many Little
Candles, is a treacherous master. Golthur, the Spider of Time, lies
in wait for those whose souls he can steal. Golthur, the Trapper,
has given his Priests these Prayers; you who pray to him, tend
your words, that your dark husbandry will not call forth your
corruption. Walk the words well, for if you fall he will ensnare
you and draw your soul through your nostrils. That is his due for
heeding your command.

SIRDHE		Patterns of Healing

Golthur of the Labyrinth, we ask your indulgence,
We who are weakened call you,
Send your strength to our wearied limbs,
And we will fight for your glory.

HOLNAK		Priestly Strength

Golthur, Silent Lord, I ask your kindness;
Look upon your servant protected by the doyaqur,
Send your pwer to course throught these arms,
That I might server you better in your designs.

ELIS		Walking Into Light

Golthur, you must hear the voice calling from this circle,
To the lowlands, where one needs your help;
Take the failing body you see before you,
And create new and whole its life force.

TELIS		Caressing Hands

Golthur, Lamp of the Heavens, here at an Altar,
We come to ask you to give us our strength,
To give us our health and wholeness,
We who would supplicate you.

BEYONG		Virginal Sanctity

Golthur, Ancient One, hear your Priest,
Take from our bodies the poison of your experience,
Take from our souls the plague of your knowledge,
That we may walk in the innocence of health again.




PRAYERS TO FSHOFTH, GOD OF THE SPRITUAL SELF

Fshofth, Invisible Mage, Cold Walker, Thief of the Red Cities,
Holder of Mysteries, Guardian of the Spirits, Chief of the Eagles,
is a strange god. The wild dictates of his worship seem hardly
those of a god, and are understood by few. Of all his Prayers these
are those that seem to have some chance of being answered by
this Master. The untranslatable Prayer of Lairian is included; the
Priest who can harness this Prayer would be powerful indeed.
None of the Priests of Fshofth have managed to gain its deep
secrets.

NULAMIR		The Quiet House

Fshofth, On the shore of the lost lake,
There is a house. Though the spell makers talk,
It is quiet still. For though chanting sounds,
It will little disturb the air where they dwell.

TULAR		Gaunt Dreams

Fshofth, at an Altar there is a glade,
Green leaves and colored monkeys,
Fruit drop from the vines, and lie
Rotting on the ground.

RULASAIR	Guant Needs

Fshofth, there is no sound on the rocks,
No wind among the grasses;
The liraya has made its kill,
The pups shall feast tonight.

EMANUI		Growing Health

Fshofth, within the smallest quivering cell,
After the cold kiss, there is less life strength,
But growing within the beating heart,
I feel that quickenss return.

KUURAOTH	The Waking Vision

Fshofth, hard at the kauri branch, a bird dips;
Takes honey from the silvered flowers, and stops,
Troubled by a dark mirage, far in the forest.
Your glass will shatter the foundations of the dream.

LAIRIAN		The Untranslatable Prayer

Umhir deln Fshofth, Du saq mishallfen,
Ersan su stramanlisa du saq verhallfen,
Itor ka skirian, thror qastura taras,
Wur qanar qur stilor qur kas.