The First Arkana: FIRE

These Spells are weapons, to strike those who stand against you.
They are weapons of heat and flame, which can burn deep wounds
and cause great damage.  The Spells fo the First Arkana
concentrate heat upon their targets, and will not touch large
numbers of foes.  Only creatures born of fire will be resistant
to the effects of these Spells.

THE IRON SPELLS:

2	AMRAS	The Snake of Fire

	A bolt of flame shall grow from your staff and strike
	one foe.  This and all snake Spells have speed and range,
	for they can reach any who would stand against you, but
	they must follow a straight path: they cannot travel
	through rock.  Though this snake is but iron, it can burn
	a deep wound.

3	ORLOS	The Flame of the Eye

	Orlos is the flame minor, and it shall bathe those who
	stand within five feet of you.  The flame shall search their
	hearts: if they are pure then they shall pass unscathed, if
	they harbor destruction they shall be burnt.

THE COPPER SPELLS:

4	AMRASMUR	The Copper Snake of Fire

	The copper snake has more strength.  Its venom will burn
	a lesser foe unto ashes, and will course through the veins
	of stronger goes like fiery sparks.

6	ORLOSMUR	The Copper Flame of the Eye

	Orlosmur is the flame major, and it too will scald those
	impure of heart who raise violence against you.  The
	flame is not a reaching one, for it cannot touch those
	who stand beyond five feet.

THE SILVER SPELLS:

7	AMRASAKIM	The Silver Snake of Fire

	The silver snake is stronger than the copper snake, and
	its bold more powerful.  In addition, silver is the bane of
	the undead, and this Spell is much feared by all those of
	evil called forth from death.

9	KUN	The Furnave of the Mind

	When Kun is cast, the caster's psychic energy becomes a
	sheet of white hot flame which surges outward in all
	directions.  All enemies within ten feet shall be covered
	by this flame.

THE GOLD SPELLS:

11	AMRASLAZAR	The Golden Snake of Fire

	Few can withstand the searing burn of the golden snake:
	any victim struck will be seriously wounded, for the fire
	of gold is indeed great.

13	KUNLAZAR	The Golden Furnace of the Mind

	The purity of gold makes Kunlazar a mightier Spell than
	Kun.  Although it has the same range, its effects are far
	greater, and those immersed by the flame will be badly
	scalded.

THE PLATINUM SPELLS:

16	AMRASTEL	The Platinum Snake of Fire

	This is the most powerful of the Fire snakes. Platinum is
	the noblest of the metals and imparts its rarity to the
	power of this Spell. Strong indeed is the being that can
	stand against this bolt of flame.

19	KUNTEL	The Platinum Furnace of the Mind

	The furnace of Kuntel is so hot that it will melt flesh and
	incinerate the exposed bones of the enemy. Unless born
	of fire, all foes within ten feet must undergo these
	torturous burns, and all but the strongest will be
	cremated into dust.

THE CRYSTAL SPELL:

30	CYQIEKUN	The Furnace of the Great Mystic

	The tome of the Seer will reveal the effects and
	requirements of this fearsome Spell.



THE SECOND ARKANA: FROST

These are Spells that harness the cold power of chaos for
destruction. The Spells are not focused, and cannot be unleashed
on one being. Their chaos will spread and fill a large area, causing
all foes to undergo their effects. A few creatures will be
inpervious to Frost, but most will have cause to fear these Spells
greatly.

THE IRON SPELLS:

1	STRAL	The Frozen Hand

	All beings within your sight will be immersed in a
	chilling frost. Their strength will be saped, they will
	fight less effectively, and the shock may render them
	stunned and confused. This is one of the simplest Spells
	and can be used frequently.

3	SEHK	The Breath of Ice

	The Spell allows your breath to freeze those foes who
	stand against you. Your breath will form around them
	and will cause numbing wounds. The forces of chaos are
	powerful and even this lowly Spell demands great
	control from the caster.

THE COPPER SPELLS:

4	KRAMUR		The Tempest of Chaoes

	This conjuring calls forth a storm from the lower planes
	and casts it upon the beings who oppose you. Where the
	storm passes, many foes will be left stunned and
	defenseless.

5	SEHKMUR		The Copper Breath of Ice

	Copper is a purer metal than iron, and so Sehkmur is a
	stronger Spell than Sehk. The wounds caused are more
	severe, so too is the toll taken of the caster.

THE SILVER SPELLS:

7	KRAAKIM		The Silver Gale of Chaos

	The storm that this Spell calls forth is terrible. Its path is
	broader and its effect greather than Kramur. Beings who
	stand in the face of it shall be stunned by its power,
	unable to fight in any way.

8	SEHKAKIM	The Silver Breath of Ice

	The caster's breath shall become like unto silver spears
	striking down foes. This Spell requires more energy from
	the Spell caster than Sehkmur

THE GOLD SPELLS:

10	STRALLAZAR	The Golden Hand of Freezing

	The hand shall descend on your foes suddenly and will
	take from the their strength and the skill of their eye in
	battle. When cast, you will be illuminated with a single
	beam of golden light, which will draw the heat from the
	bodies of those around. They will remain weakened and
	confused until the heat has returned.

16	SEHKLAZAR	The Golden Breath of Ice

	A wind of extreme cold will blast from the breath of the
	caster. Damage upon all your foes will be great indeed,
	few will escape.

THE PLATINUM SPELLS:

15	KRATEL	The Platinum Maelstrom of Chaos

	This Spell calls forth a great storm from the lowest
	planes of chaos. In its wake movement itself will be
	quelled and those exposed to its fury will be frozen into
	stillness.

24	SEHKTEL		The Platinum Breath of Ice

	Your breath shall seek out your foes and strike them with
	mighty damage. None shall escape the power of this
	Spell, and only the most formidable can survive in its
	path. The wounds caused will cut as icicles to the bone,
	paralyzing and piercing the heart. This Spell demands
	much of the caster and only the strongest Magician
	should attempt it.

THE CRYSTAL SPELL:

45	MUZAQ		Cacophonous Oblivion

	This is the most fearsome and terrible destructive Spell.
	You must consult the tome of the Seer to learn its effects
	and requirements.


THE THIRD ARKANA: PROTECTION

The Third Arkana forms a vital part of your skills as a Magician.
These Spells and formulæ allow you to bend the ethereal forces to
deflect the blows andmagic of others, and influence their
behavior. Do not neglect the powers of this Arkana: they will
prove essential if you are to survive for long in hostile areas.


THE IRON SPELLS:

2	TEI	The Iron Shield

	This Spell will strengthen the armor of you and your
	companions by a moderate amount. Leather will harden
	and metal become more resilient: even cloth is
	strengthened by this Spell. The Spell is long-lived, but its
	powers are modest.

3	SEL	The Iron Armor

	All those who stand with the caster will have the
	strength of their armor substantially increased for a brief
	period. This Spell forms magical armor around each
	person. Althoug this armor is strong, it cannot last long.

THE COPPERS SPELLS:

6	SELMUR		The Copper Armor

	Copper is a nobler metal than iron, and so this Spell is
	more potent than Sel. The strength of its magical armor
	is such that it will bear twice the damage of Sel's armor.
	However, like Sel, it is a Spell that is not long lasting.

5	TASRAK		The Shell of the Unborn

	This highly valuable Spell may only be cast upon
	yourself. For a brief moment, it will seem as if a cocoon
	of fine, strong copper fibres entwined with red silk
	encompasses your body. This magical shell is completely
	impervious to all physical attacks, but it will vanish
	before long. Use this power when you have strayed into a
	position of vulnerability near your opponents; but
	remember that it is far better to avoid such dangers, as
	Magicians are never of a strong physical constitution,
	and can withstand only a few wounds to the flesh.

THE SILVER SPELLS:

10	SELAKIM		The Silver Armor

	The strength of Selakim's armor is that of Selmur; the
	virtue of this Spell is that the purity of silver allows the
	incantation to last for a much longer time. The Spell is
	one that is very draining to cast and maintain.

5	RESEN		The Globe of Peace

	On casting the Spell, you will be surrounded by a vast
	shimmering dome. Although the Spell is an ephemeral
	one, for its duration no magic may harm the party within
	its curcumference. This is a valuable Spell, but beware
	that it has a very short duration and must be cast many
	times.

7	FSIRITH		The Talisman of Awe

	This Spell creates, in the palm of the caster's hand, an
	illusion of a talisman shaped to the likeness of
	whichever thing each of your foes dreads the most. This
	image will, if the enemy is fooled, cause it to flee from
	you. Those creatures without fear or without a mind of
	their own cannot be scared away; and those of high
	intelligence may well realize the talisman is just an
	illusion.

THE GOLD SPELLS:

7	TEILAZAR	The Golden Shield

	Teilazar will substantially strengthen the armor of your
	party.  This preparation is stronger than the Iron Spell and
	will last for a longer period of time.

5	AROMIR		The Water of Waking

	Aromir, when cast, will create a small flask of a
	brilliantly clear liquid. This must be taken immediately,
	and on swallowing fills the drinkers with a magical
	energy that will refresh and revitalize them. This
	increased vitality will help resist disease and minimize
	the severity of wounds. There is enough liquie in the
	flask for four people.

16	SILAMEKSH	The Silken Shroud of Life

	This mysterious Spell will hold the life force of each of
	your party with a shroud of finest blue silk, so that any
	physical blow you receive will be deflected. Death shall
	be denied its toll. Silameksh, once cast, will last for
	much of a combat's duration.

THE PLATINUM SPELLS:

14	RESENTEL	The Cyanic Globe of Peace

	Resentel is a Spell that requires much greater
	concentration that Resen. Like Resen it creates a done
	within which no Spell may harm the party, but the rarity
	of platinum allows the dome to endure for a longer time.

20	MUAMAAR		Phantasmal Terror

	A most horrible vision will be brought to bear upon each
	creature that threatens you when this Spell is intoned.
	While the talisman of Fsirith appeared as a likeness of
	the thing most dreaded, this phantasm will seem to have
	true presence and may assume any proportions. The
	illusion is so overwhelming that only foes of the most
	superior intelligence will be able to disbelieve what they
	see; all others will turn and flee in terror. As the
	phantasm does not affect you, nothing save a few bluish
	sparks will be visible to your party.

THE CRYSTAL SPELL:

30	QADIOS		The Womb of Infinite Safety

	The tome of the seer must be consulted before
	attempting this great Spell.


THE FOURTH ARKANA: HEALING

No traveler could endure the trials of venturing forth withou
Healing. The Spells of the Fourth Arkana are devoted to these
subtle and cunning arts. These are the true test of your skill, for
the magic is the product of the caster's art alone. Know that no
Spell is powerful enough to breathe life into the lips of one who
has died; only the High Priest of the White Order can restore life
where it has ceased to exist.

THE IRON SPELL

1	SHUM	 The Simplest Salve

	This is the simplest and least draining of all the Healing
	Spells. On casting the Spell, a magic salve will form over
	one wound of one person and that wound will be closed.

THE COPPER SPELLS

3	SHUMMUR		The Copper Salve

	This Spell, like Shum, creates a magic salve which can
	heal the wounds of one person. Shummur is a greater
	Spell and will heal more serious wounds.

4	HELAS		The Many Fingers of Healing

	This Spell will apply its gentle ministrations to all in the
	caster's presence. Those companions, and the caster, will
	quickly be healed of most light wounds.

5	LUQMAR		Waking

	This simple Spell can be applied to any person. It will
	instantly free that being from stunning or paralysis.
	Thiese adverse effects will normally wear off with time,
	but it may not be safe to wait.

THE SILVER SPELLS

8	SHUMAKIM	The Silver Salve

	The silver salve Spell is again more powerful. It will
	mend skin and flesh, healing serious wounds quickly.

7	ISO	Air

	This incantation involves drawing the air from one
	afflicted by poison into the caster's own lungs. This will
	cure the poisoning.

THE GOLD SPELLS

12	SHUMLAZAR	The Golden Salve

	The most powerful salve Spell will completely heal all
	the wounds of the recipient, no matter how close to
	death he was.

11	HELASLAZAR	The Many Golden Fingers of Healing

	Incantation of Helaslazar will call forth a phantasm of
	many golden rays of light. These will cover all those in
	the gaze of the caster and heal any wounds that have not
	cleaved to the bone.

13	ISUL	Cleansing Air

	Isul will draw the infected air from one who has been
	touched by the plague. The Spell is very dangerous to
	cast; you must draw the plague into your body, and then
	make an antidote within your own body and pass it into
	the infected one. This will place you at great risk of being
	infected yourself, but the plague is a most dreaded
	disease, and must be cured with urgency.

THE PLATINUM SPELLS

23	HELASTEL	The Many Platinum Fingers of Healing

	This Spell will bathe the caster and those around with a
	brilliant blue-white flickering light. When the light lifts,
	all wounds, no matter how serious, will have vanished.

6	SAMECLU		Purity of Sanctuary

	The Sanctuaries constructed by the Ancients allow all
	within their walls to be cured of any disease and healed
	of their wounds when this Spell is cast. It must be cast in
	the unthreatened ambience of a Sanctuary, and will fail
	utterly if attempted elsewhere.

THE CRYSTAL SPELL

33	CYQIETUR	Ceaseless Healing

	The tome of the seer describes the effects and
	requirements of this wondrous incantaion.



THE FIFTH ARKANA: KNOWLEDGE

The Fifth Arkana, the discipline of Knowledge, provides powers
that combine the forces of magic with your own intelligence to
amplify and expand the normal abilities of the human mind.
These Spells are diverse in nature, but all are affected by the
concentration of your superior intelligence upon the tutelage of
your craft.

THE IRON SPELLS

1	NGOS	The Glowing Script

	On casting Ngos, a beam of light will fly from your hand
	to the closest written word. The light will course along
	the runes and search for the meaning behind them. Ngos
	is a simple Spell and has not great power.

3	LUM	Light

	By your will a bright light will appear in the air directly
	in front of the party, to guide you through darkened
	areas. The light will fade and dissipate after a short time.

THE COPPER SPELLS

3	NGOSMUR		The Glowing Copper Script

	Like Ngos, Ngosmur will prise from inscriptions their
	meaning. Ngosmur is a more powerful Spell, and mighty
	is the inscription that will not eventually yield its
	meaning to the glowing copper script.

8	TALIS	The Spirit of Observation

	Talis will create a chimerical spirit, an extension of you
	senses, that will hover beside its creator. This spirit has
	powerful sight, and should it pass by a hidden dorr, its
	gaze will attempt to reveal the door to you.

THE SILVER SPELLS

4	ALTIS	The Psychic Key

	Many secret doors have been bound shut by magic. This
	Spell will attempt to use a great magical force to open
	such doors to you and your companions. It can also
	release doors that are held with some physical
	obstruction, but this may require more than one
	application.

5	EZAHM	The Water of Strength

	Like Aromir, Ezahm distils a magical liquid. This liquid
	forms in a few precious drops on the staff of the caster.
	These drops, when placed on the tongue of one, fill the
	person with a maniacal strength for a short while.

THE GOLD SPELLS

8	NGOSLAZAR	The Glowing Golden Script

	This Spell is the most powerful and adcanved translation
	Spell. Any inscriptions that do not yield their meaning to
	this Spell had already lost all sense before recorded
	history.

7	LUMLAZAR	Golden Light

	This Spell wills a magical light to appear in front of the
	party of the caster. The Spell uses the power of gold and
	lasts well.

21	REAAM	True Revelation

	With accession to the higer echelons fot the Arkana of
	Knowledge, you will gain the ability to extract the true
	identity of any inanimate object that you may carry. All
	objects carried by the caster when this Spell is used will
	be accurately identified.

THE PLATINUM SPELLS

8	LENTIIS		The Holding Heart

	This Spell affects the forces that bind time to this world.
	When cast, the passage of time around the party will be
	slowed for a moderate period. This dilation of time can
	affect the severity of poisons, the speed and agility of
	enemies in combat, your consumption of food, and even
	the duration of other Spells you have in effect at the
	time. It is your responsibility to use the valuable Spell
	where it will be of most benefit to your party. Also, be
	aware that certain creatures have the ability to control
	time for their own purposes. reversing the effect of this
	Spell.

15	SATOR	The Mind Siphon

	The mysterious powers of your will may, by this
	incantation, be used to bind and feed upon the psychic
	energies of a foe of like intelligence. The siphon will seek
	out from those against you, one who is also capable of
	the use of magic. If there is such an enemy present, the
	siphon will attempt to forge a channel between your two
	minds, through which you may drain his psychic energy,
	weakening his powers and restoring your own. While the
	siphon is attached, he will be incapable of using any
	magic. Powerful minds will try to resist this fearsome
	Spell, but it is strong and a highly valuable part of your
	discipline.

1	ROTAS	Suction

	This is the Spell that is used to draw psychic energy
	through the mind siphon. It has no effect unless Sator
	has first been used to establish a link. While a siphon is
	attached to an enemy, you must concentrate your
	complete attention on maintaining its hold. Every time
	you act, you must cast the Rotas Spell, which will both
	reinforce the siphon and draw some of the victim's
	energy through to your mind. This Spell, therefore,
	increased your psychic energy each time it is successfully
	cast. The more powerful your foe, the more energy will
	be gained each time it is cast. The mind siphon will
	eventually break, but if you fail to cast Rotas even once,
	it will break immediately. Once broken, a siphon cannot
	be re-established.

THE CRYSTAL SPELL

27	CYQIEQARAQK	The Tome of the Seer

	With the final mastery of the Arkana of Knowledge
	comes the power to consult the tome of the great seer
	Sieqsiethsh. This mystical work is kept in a sealed
	bronze case on one of the astral planes. It can never be
	read by human eye, and its runes would in any case defy
	translation, but the magic of the Crystal Ring of
	Knowledge can concentrate the psychic powers of the
	Magician, from any place of Sanctuary, to form a
	clairvoyant view of a part of the tome, in a language of
	the caster's own. The tome contains the secrets of the
	Crystal Spells in all the Arkana, their purpose, effect, and
	requirements for casting; along with other prophecies of
	great wisdom and foresight. Study the writings of the
	tome carefully, and heed their portent.