Eamon #74 "DharmaQuest" Walkthrough by Tom Zuchowski


In this adventure, you have offended Hokas, and he sends you to another
land to learn some manners and compassion.

First, the hints for those who wish to solve it on their own:

If you delete line 19050 from the MAIN PGM, you can restart a saved game
more than once. You will need a separate "Save" disk . This disk will be
formatted and erased when you save a game to it.

There are two ways to exit the adventure. One is through a simple
magical portal, which can be done at any time once you find it. The
other exit is more difficult to achieve, and gives a far more satisfying
outcome. The maximum outcome ends with the gods boosting every one of
your major stats. Those of you who use cheater-superman characters will
not want to return to the Main Hall, as the reward maxes your main stats
to 25.

Use the Ring of Asroth sparingly. You must kill some enemies in the
conventional fashion in order to learn every clue you need to completely
solve this outing.

There is a bug that deposits you in the Temple of Aphrodite if you SAY
something that the program doesn’t recognize. You will find things less
confusing if you only SAY things you are reasonably sure that the SAY
routine should recognize.

There is a random chance that you will be denied entrance at each of the
four temples. There is nothing in these temples that you have to have in
order to achieve the maximum outcome. If you want to complete all of the
temples, here is a workaround:

1) If the statue disappears and your prayers are ignored, halt the game
with a Control-C, then type:

			R2=xx:POKE51,0:GOTO3500


2) Replace "R2=xx" with these values:

            Temple of Poseidon:       R2=39 
            Temple of Apollo:         R2=45 
            Temple of Aphrodite:      R2=63 
            Temple of Artemis:        R2=52

Be aware that the gods cherish their pets!

OK, those are enough hints. Let’s get started!

Many people that you meet have a random chance of being friend of foe.
Take care of them as necessary if they are enemies. Note that there are
some exceptions, listed below.

Note the new commands: PRAY, HELP

As you begin, there is nothing to see in any direction but north, so go
N and meet Gwynnith. Continue N, then go E into a cave and meet
Polydorus

Continue E deeper into the cave and discover TABLET1. EXAMINE TABLET1
(NOTE: you MUST use the FULL command! Command abbreviations often do not
work with the EXAMINE command in this Eamon.)

You learn about 4 great wizards’ magical rings: Ilgaard’s opens locks
and seals

Twalrep’s cures wounds

Xantec’s gives wisdom

Asroth’s destroys all in its path


Return W twice to the canyon, then go N into the valley Climb U into a
small cave and meet a hermit in trouble. HELP the hermit, and acquire
the bronze Ring of Ilgaard. Return D to the valley.

Continue N to the river bank, then go N again into the river, and
discover TABLET2. EXAMINE TABLET2, which reads:

F.OM ..S..TH CAME ….R,THE B.A.. WIZARD .. KIL.ED THE FOUR AND USED A
SPELL TO WELD THE RINGS INTO THE ULTIMATE RING OF POWER.HE WAS SLAIN BY
THE GODS FOR THE SIN OF HUBRIS AND THE RINGS SCATTER.. TO THE FOUR
.INDS. THEY … … ..

That looks interesting! We’ll have to remember that.

Go W upriver and help a drowning boy. He tells you that death lurks west
of here and east of the ford. Believe him, and return E.

Continue E. Here is the ford, so let’s turn N. Continue N again into the
village.

There is nothing of real interest in the huts; explore them as you wish.

Continue N into the Grove of Athena. Help the old woman, and acquire the
golden Ring of Xantec. SAY XANTEC and learn how to use rings (I guess
you already knew that, though, huh.)

Return S three times. Continue S to the south side of the river and meet
Deiphobus. Then go W three times along the path.

Don’t go D below the bridge. This is the same point in the river that
laid W of the boy, and Death awaits there. Instead, go N across the
bridge and meet Polydamus.

Continue N to the city gate. The gates are locked and you are blocked
here. This looks like a good place to try out the Ring of Ilgaard – SAY
ILGAARD. You find yourself on the Main Plaza, where you meet Memnon.

You will get yourself into some combat if you GET the statue of
Patroclos. There is nothing to be gained apart from the thrill of combat
and the chance to see a couple Effects. It’s your call.

Go N to the palace, then go W and find a crying girl who can’t get her
cat. HELP the girl. Have you noticed that none of these people in
trouble quite seem to be what they appear to be? Return E.

Go N twice to the throne room, then N and meet Machaon.. EXAMINE
TABLET3. Hmm. To gain the power, you have to not only possess the four
rings but must also be noble of spirit? Well, we have been helping all
of these people . . .

SAY XANTEC and learn of a secret passage down. Go D and meet Theoclymus.
SAY XANTEC again and learn of another secret door down. Continue D and
meet Xuthus.

You have found a gold box. SAY ILGAARD. Get the black Ring of Asroth and
some other loot. Do not ever say ASROTH unless you have an enemy
standing before you! Even then, use it sparingly. When you destroy an
enemy, you also destroy whatever he is carrying; so only use it when you
are sure you won’t want what they might have, or if you are perhaps
trying to leave no evidence. I wound up not using it at all and didn’t
miss it.

Return U twice and go N into a courtyard. SAY XANTEC and discover
another secret passage down.

Go D and discover a sarcophagus. EXAMINE INSCRIPTION. The Black Wizard!
The tablet said that we need his name to forge the rings together. Let’s
see if we can find any clues in the sarcophagus. SAY ILGAARD.

Oops. He’s not so dead, after all. Kill him with your weapon. Do not use
the Ring of Asroth! If you use the ring, you will never learn his name.
As soon as he dies, note his name! It will appear just as he dies. You
get just this one chance to learn it, so be attentive. Write it down, as
it changes with each play.

Return U, S, and E. Continue E and meet Phaedra. SAY ILGAARD to open the
silver box, and discover the silver Ring of Twalrep. If you are injured,
feel free to use this ring as needed to heal yourself. You may require
multiple tries before you become totally rejuvenated.

OK, we’ve got all of the rings, and we know the Black Wizard’s name. But
let’s hold off on that until we’re through exploring everything else.

Return W, then go N and meet Nemo. I expect you’ll have to kill him.
Continue E into the wizard’s lair. EXAMINE INSCRIPTION over the door. Is
this the exit? (Yes, this is the quick way out. But we are going for max
points here, so don’t go through it!)

Return W, then S four times to the Main Plaza. Go D to the Plaza of
Temples.

Go W into Temple of Aphrodite and PRAY.

(If the statue disappears, this temple is barred to you. You can still
proceed by halting the game with control-C and then typing:
	R2=63:POKE51,0:GOTO3500 
.)

EXAMINE INSCRIPTION over the east door. Big deal, danger, and glory, the
usual stuff. Yada, yada.

Go E through the door. It becomes blocked behind you – you’re trapped!
EXAMINE INSCRIPTION on the wall and find a riddle! Luckily, it’s the old
Sphinx riddle that we’ve all seen on many an outing. Answer MAN and
learn the magic word to exit (get it right the first time—you just get
one chance.)

Get the gold ingots, then SAY NAUTA to escape the room.

Explore the south room if you wish, then go into the west room and meet
Helen. SAY XANTEC and learn of a hidden door behind the mosaic. Go N and
find yourself back in the little girl’s garden. Return E, S, D to the
Temple Plaza.

Go N into the Temple of Apollo, and PRAY.

(If the statue disappears, this temple is barred to you. You can still
proceed by halting the game with control-C and then typing:
	R2=45:POKE51,0:GOTO3500
.)

Go N, then W, and get the hamster. Return E. Continue E and meet
Admetus. Get the chest if you wish. Continue N and meet Cassandra.

SAY XANTEC and find a secret passage down. Go D and find a crown. Get
the crown. A python appears! Do not kill him. Give him the hamster and
earn his trust.

Again SAY XANTEC and learn of another hidden passage in the floor.
Continue D and meet Astynax. Go S and return to the Temple Plaza.

Go E into the Temple of Poseidon, and PRAY

(If the statue disappears, this temple is barred to you. You can still
proceed by halting the game with control-C and then typing:
	R2=39:POKE51,0:GOTO3500
.)

Go W and get the salt. Return E. Explore the south room and return.

Go E and meet Thetis, and then continue N. SAY XANTEC and discover a
secret passage north, behind the mosaic. Get the golden cup. A sacred
bull appears! Do not kill him. Give him the salt and earn his trust.

Go D into the pool, and find yourself in the small cave near the
beginning. Return to the Temple Plaza (D, N, W, W, N, N, SAY ILGAARD, D)

Go S into the Temple of Artemis, and PRAY

(If the statue disappears, this temple is barred to you. You can still
proceed by halting the game with control-C and then typing:
	R2=52:POKE51,0:GOTO3500
.)

Go N, then E, and meet three Amazons (alternatively, you can go S and
circumnavigate the island until you run into them from the other
direction.)

Go S, then D and meet Andromache and Clytemnaestra. Get the jewels, then
return U.

Continue U and meet Penthesilea and her leopard. EXAMINE INSCRIPTION on
the door. It says THE FIRST SHALL BE LAST AND THE LAST FIRST. SAY DNEIRF
AND ENTER.

That’s simple enough—SAY FRIEND and find yourself on the path outside
the city.

OK, we’ve done it all. Time for the finale. SAY the Black Wizard’s name.

Lots of gods here. Let’s try PRAY and see what happens.

Not bad!