"Bomb Alley" bugs and undocumented features:

1) Gary Grigsby accidentally carried over a line of code from
"Guadalcanal Campaign" that halves the effectiveness of the Allied
torpedo bombers. Thus, the true accuracy rating of the Swordfish is 2,
and that of the Beaufort is 1.

2) All bombers have a search range of 10. The code that limits the
search range ends up limiting every non-float-plane aircraft to the
shortest range, that of the JU87. Also, submarine search range is
halved; submarines beyond a range of 5 are undetectable. (Except for the
Computer British player.)

3) The loss of supplies when transferring to the Afrika Korps or Eighth
Army is twice what the "docs" say it is:  the percentage equals the
distance to the "front" divided by fifty. Also, the supplies are stored
in Applesoft integers--this means that ALL fractions are rounded down.

4) A "bug" in Grigsby's code prevents Gibraltar from receiving any
reinforcement supplies; what the British start with is all they get
there.

5) One nasty thing that a human British player could do is put all (or
nearly all) of the 8th Army into Tobruk. In the original game, the Axis
cannot advance beyond Tobruk until it falls, and the British troops put
up impressive defensive fire when occupying the fortifications. I
recommend a "house rule" limiting the number of troops the British can
put in Tobruk--350 companies sounds like a reasonable maximum.

6) The "docs" are all wet about the effect of sighting a submarine TF.
All that happens is that the hit probability of each of the submarine's
torpedoes is reduced to the minimum of 15% -- if it wasn't that low
already. There is NO change to depth charge attack.

7) Battleship main guns actually do an average of 8 points of damage
instead of 7 during surface combat. Grigsby meant to give the "Nelson"
class BB's extra firepower because they had 16-inch guns, but the code
ends up affecting all the BB's.

8) A special bit of code decreases the accuracy of all air attacks
against the DML "Welshman" by 80%. An Axis player who wants to sink her
would be wise to use surface combat.

9) Although transports can only join "T" mission TF's, tankers can join
almost any TF. I can't think of any good reason to do this, though; the
tankers would then be subject to TF endurance reductions. Also, tankers
cannot perform amphibious unloading if they are part of non-"T"
missions.