War In Russia Page 
War In Russia
 1.0  Introduction...........................1
 2.0  General Description....................1
 3.0  Sequence of Play.......................1
 4.0  Group Adjustment Phase.................1
 5.0  Supply.................................3
 6.0  Movement...............................3
 7.0  Tactical Execution - Combat Phase......4
 8.0  General Operations.....................5
 9.0  Victory Conditions.....................7
10.0  Solitaire Play.........................7
1.0  INTRODUCTION
WAR IN RUSSIA is an operational level game featuring combat between 
Axis and Soviet armies in Russia from 1941-44. Every combat division/corps 
available to the Axis and Soviet commanders is now under your control. 
Included are campaign games for Barbarossa (1941), Case Blue (1942) and 
Zitadelle (1943).
1.1  Description of Action:
Each game turn is one week in length. A game turn consists of: (1) 
building and adjusting friendly combat groups; (2) supplying and moving your 
combat groups; (3) plotting air strikes and tactical movement; (4) 
tactical/combat resolution.
1.2  Talking to the Computer:
To enter a response to the computer that consists of numbers (such as 
combat group identification numbers) type the number into the computer and 
press the <RETURN> key. To select a routine from a menu or answer a Yes/No 
question, just press the desired key.
1.3  Saving a Game:
At various points during each game turn the computer will allow the 
player(s) to save the game in progress. You will need a scratch disk to store 
the saved game data. The disk must be initialized for SSI use during the game 
by following instructions included in the game program (Atari owners may use 
any Atari formatted disk). Once a game is saved you will be able to restart 
it at the point you left off.
1.4  The Map:
The map is a 31 x 32 hex grid representation of western Russia. Each 
hex measures 50 miles in width.
1.5  Starting the Game (Apple DOS 3.2 or 3.3)
To begin the game, boot the Scenario side of your disk. The game will 
begin automatically. After selecting the starting values for your game, you 
will be told to insert the game side of your disk. If you are using an Apple 
II with Pascal, you must first use your BASICS disk. If you are using an 
Apple III, you must first go into Apple II emulation mode.
1.6  Starting the Game (Atari):
Remove all cartridges, then insert the game disk in drive 1 and turn on 
the computer. If you own an Atari 800XL, hold down the OPTION key while 
booting.
2.0  GENERAL DeSCRIPTION
2.1  Parts Inventory:
A. Game box
B. Rule Book
C. 5 1/4 " game disk
D. Two map data cards
2.2  Abbreviations:
Abbreviations used in the game are explained below:
INFinfantry
MOTmotorized infantry
PZGpanzer grenadier
PZpanzer
CAV cavalry
MECHmechanized
GDSguards
MTNmountain infantry
JGJager (light infantry)
LWLuftwaffe infantry
PARAparachute infantry
ITItalian
FINFinnish
RUMRumanian
HUNHungarian
The following abbreviations are for the Axis divisions with names 
instead of numbers:
SLOSlovakian
G.DGrossdeutchland
LAHLiebstandarte Adolph Hitler (1 MOT div)
D.RDas Reich (2 SS MOT div)
TOTTotenkopf (3 SS MOT div)
POLPolizei (4 SS INF div)
WIKWiking (5 SS MOT div)
NORNord (6 SS MTN div)
P.EPrinz Eugen (7 SS MTN div)
F.GFlorian Geyr (8 SS CAV div)
HOHHohenstauffen (9 SS MOT div)
FRUFrundsberg (10 SS MOT div)
N.LNordland (11 SS MOT div)
H.JHitlerjugend (12 SS MOT div)
HANHandscar (13 SS MTN div)
GALGaliz #1 (14 SS INF div)
LETLett #1 (15 SS INF div)
R.FReichsfuhrer (16 SS MOT div)
G.BGotz von Berlichingen (17 SS MOT div)
H.WHorst Wessel (18 SS MOT div)
3.0  SEQUENCE OF PLAY
WAR IN RUSSiA is designed to be a two-sided game: Axis vs. Soviet. The Axis 
forces must be commanded by a human player. The Soviet forces may be 
commanded by either a human or the computer.
3.1  Scenario Selection Phase:
During the scenario selection phase, the player(s) select a scenario 
and determine the conditions under which the game will be played.The set-up 
may be changed by entering the following numbers:
(1) New Game or Saved Game
(2) l Disk Drive or 2 Disk Drives
(3) Solitaire or Two-player
(4) Solitaire Level of Difficulty (1-4)
The scenario may be altered by entering the following numbers:
(5) Barbarossa (Jun 22 1941)
(6) Case Blue (Jun 29 1942)
(7) Zitadelle (July 4 1943
The Atari version does not allow the use of 2 disk drives. Instead the 
user is allowed to choose between normal delay loops or fast (short) delay 
loops during the display of combat results
3.2  Scenario Set-up:
At the start of each game the computer will assign all combat units to 
their historical starting locations.
3.3  Sequence:
A. Axis Group Adjustment/Build Phase
B. Soviet Group Adjustment/Build Phase
C. Soviet Supply Phase
D. Soviet Movement/Tactical Plot Phase
E. Axis Supply Phase
F. Axis Movement/Tactical Plot Phase
G. Tactical Execution/Combat Phase
4.0  GROUP ADJUSTMENT-BUILD PHASE
During the Group Adjustment-Build Phase of each turn the players may 
adjust the composition of their combat and air groups; build new units. 
factories and rail hexes; and view the current situation using the map 
displays.
4.1  Combat Groups:
There are two types of combat groups: (1) mechanized, (2) infantry. 
Axis mechanized groups will be assigned identification numbers 1 - 11. Axis 
infantry groups will be numbered 12 - 51. Soviet mechanized groups will be 
numbered 64 - 75. Soviet infantry groups will be numbered 76-115. Combat 
groups may contain from 1-6 units (divisions or corps). Mechanized groups may 
only contain the following types of units: PZ, PZG, MOT, TANK, and MECH (the 
1 C IT MOT unit may not be placed in a mechanized group). Infantry groups may 
contain any type of unit.
During the Group Adjustment Phase the unit composition of friendly 
combat groups may be altered using the following menu routines: (1) DIVIDE 
GROUP, (2) TRANSFER UNIT, (N) NAVAL MOVEMENT.
4.2 Air Groups:
Each air group may contain from 0-255 aircraft points. Aircraft points 
represent approximately 10 combat aircraft of various types. Axis air groups 
will be numbered 52 - 57. Soviet air groups will be numbered 116 - 121. 
Aircraft points may be transferred between friendly airfields using the menu 
routines (3) TRANSFER AiRCRAFT.
4.3 Dividing Combat Groups:
A combat group may be divided using the menu routine (1) DIVIDE GROUP. 
You may not divide a group that is currently stacked with another group.
Enter the number of the group you wish to divide. When the computer 
prompts, select the type of new group to be formed (If there are no unused 
group numbers of that type then the computer will abort your divide group 
attempt). The component units of the dividing group will be listed, numbered 
0 - 6. Enter the number of a unit you wish to transfer and press <RETURN>. 
Continue the process until you have transferred all of the desired units. 
Press <RETURN> to go back to the main menu. If the dividing group loses all 
of its component units then it will be removed from the map.
If the dividing group contains artillery points then you will be 
allowed to transfer some or all of these points to the new group.
4.4  Transferring Units:
Units may be transferred between two combat groups that occupy the same 
hex using the menu routine (2) TRANSFER UNIT. The computer will prompt you to 
enter the numbers of the gaining and losing groups. The computer will list 
the component units of the losing (top) and gaining (bottom) groups, numbered 
0 - 6. Enter the number of the unit you wish to transfer and press <RETURN>. 
Continue the process for each unit you wish to transfer. Press <RETURN> to go 
back to the main menu. The gaining group may never contain more than six 
units. If the losing group transfers all of its units then it will be removed 
from the map.
If the losing group contains artillery points then some or all may be 
transferred to the gaining group.
4.5  Transferring Aircraft:
Aircraft points maybe transferred between friendly air groups using the 
menu routine (3) TRANSFER AIRCRAFT. The computer will display the number of 
aircraft points available in each air group. The computer will prompt you to 
enter the numbers of the losing and gaining air groups and then the number of 
aircraft points you wish to transfer. You may transfer a maximum of 50 
aircraft points per turn. An air group may contain a maximum of 255 aircraft 
points.
Both players will periodically receive aircraft reinforcements which 
will be added to their air reinforcement pool. To transfer aircraft points 
from the pool into an air group use the TRANSFER AIRCRAFT routine and type 
"R" as the losing group (this will count towards the maximum of 50 
transferable aircraft points).
4.6  Map Display:
The players may view the map and the status of their forces using the 
menu routine (4) MAP DISPLAY. The game map is 31 hexes wide and 32 hexes high 
yet only a 13 x 7 hex section can be shown on the screen. The map can be made 
to scroll across the screen by moving the white cursor to the appropriate 
edge of the map. The cursor can be moved by typing the numbers 1 - 6 (1 = 
north, 2 = northeast, 3 = southeast, 4 = south. 5 = southwest, 6 = 
northwest). The units on the map may obstruct your view of the terrain in 
their hex. To view the map without any units press (T): Press <SPACE> and the 
map will return to normal.
To view the contents or find the identification number of friendly 
groups on the map, move the cursor on top of the group (or stack) and press 
(L) to look. The identification number of the group(s) will be displayed 
along with the component units STRENGTH, EXPERIENCE, and FATIGUE. The group 
artillery strength and entrenchment level will also be displayed.
4.7  Strategic Map Display (Apple only) :
To view the entire map on one screen use menu routine (5) STRATEGIC MAP 
DISPLAY.
4.8  Building Factories:
The players may build factories on turns in which they have 1 or more 
points in their completed factory pool. To build factories use menu routine 
BUILD FACTORY. The computer will list the eligible cities and the number of 
factories of each type that the city currently supports. Enter the number of 
the city where your factory will be built.You may build 4 types of factories: 
(1) Heavy Industry, (2) vehicle, (3) artillery, (4) aircraft. You may 
continue building factories until the factory pool reaches zero.
The BUILD FACTORY routine may also be used to dismantle factories. 
Enter the number of the city whose factories should be dismantled. There is a 
random chance that some or all of the factories will be successfully 
dismantled. Dismantled factories will be converted into construction points 
ranging from 1 to 5 (see section 8.5). Only one city per turn may attempt to 
dismantle factories.
4.9  Building Units:
New units may be built using the menu routine BUILD UNIT. New units 
must be built in a friendly controlled city with a population greater than 
zero (this city may not be adjacent to an enemy unit). The computer will list 
the cities that meet the above criteria. Enter the number of the city in 
which you will build the new unit(s). You will be prompted to enter the type 
of group (mechanized or infantry) in which the new unit will be built. In 
situations where building would create an overstack situation or if all of 
the group numbers for the selected group type are being used then the 
computer will abort the build attempt. The total number of units controlled 
by a player may never exceed 199.
The Soviet player may build MECH, TANK and RIFLE type units. The Axis 
player may build PZ, INF, and elite SS type units. The Axis player starts the 
game with four elite SS units (LAN, DR, TOT and WIK). Starting in 1943 the 
Axis player may build THREE additional elite SS units (HOH, FRO and HJ).
In 1941 when the Soviet player selects a RIFLE unit to be built there 
is a random chance that a CAV unit will be built instead. In 41 and 42 when 
the Axis player selects an INF unit to be built there is a random chance that 
a MTN unit will be built instead. In 43, 44 and 45 when the Axis player 
selects an INF unit to be built there is a random chance that a LW INF, SS 
INF, SS MTN, or SS CAV unit will be built instead. In 43, 44 and 45 when the 
Axis player selects a PZ unit to be built there is a random chance that an SS 
PZG unit will be built instead.
The computer will display the maximum combat strength for the type of 
unit to be built. You will be prompted to enter the strength points to be 
placed in the new unit (this number must be at least 10 and must be a 
multiple of 10). Infantry and vehicle points must be spent to build combat 
points. Listed below is the cost per combat point for each type of unit:
 infantry  vehicle
INF10
RIFLE10
MTN10
CAV10
MOT11
PZG11
PZ11
TANK11
MECH21
SS elite21
The computer will not allow combat points to be built without adequate 
totals in the infantry and vehicle pools.
Listed below are the starting experience and maximum strengths for each 
type of unit:
EXPERIENCE   STRENGTH
INF (41-42)70 70
INF (43-44)10 90
SS INF10 90
MTN10 60
SS MTN10 90
CAV10 60
SS CAV10 90
JG10 60
LW INF10 60
PZ10150
SS PZ90200
PZG10130
SS PZG10140
SS PZG elite90200
MOT10100
SS MOT elite90140
IT MOT10100
IT INF10 60
RUM INF10 60
RUM CAV10 60
RUM MTN10 60
HUN INF10 60
FIN INF10120
RIFLE10 90
GDS  RIFLE10120
CAV (41-42)10 60
CAV (43-44)10 90
GDS CAV10120
PARA10120
TANK (1941)10 60
MECH (1941)20 90
TANK (42-44)10120
GDS TANK10140
MECH (42-44)70150
GDS MECH70180
All German units built in 1941 or 42 will have a starting experience of 
70.
4.10  Naval Movement:
Players may transfer friendly units by sea using the menu routine (N) 
NAVAL MOVEMENT. Naval movement may be performed between two friendly ports 
adjoining the same body of water. Listed below are the ports for each body of 
water:
BLACK SEAOdessa
Sevastapol
Krasnodar
BALTIC SEAKonigsberg
Riga
Helsinki
WHITE SEAMurmansk
Archangel
A player may transfer only one unit per turn in each body of water. The 
Soviet player may never use naval movement in the Baltic Sea. Naval movement 
is not allowed in the White Sea during COLD and VERY COLD weather.
Infantry groups must be present on both of the ports involved. These 
will be the gaining and losing groups requested by the computer in the NAVAL 
MOVEMENT routine (the procedure is the same as the transfer units routine). 
TANK, MECH, PZ, PZG, MOT, and FIN INF units may never use naval movement.
4.11  Ending the Game:
To end a game ahead of schedule use menu routine (X) END GAME. Both 
players should agree before ending the game. The computer will display the 
final score.
5.0  SUPPLY
Combat units must be in supply to remove fatigue, receive replacements 
and build up artillery. Air groups must be in supply to be eligible for 
strike or interception missions. All supply actions revolve around the use of 
friendly depot units.
5.1  Depot Units:
Axis depots are numbered 58 - 63. Soviet depots are numbered 122-127.
5.2 Depot Movement Phase:
At the start of the depot movement phase all friendly depots will be 
automatically returned to their designated starting hexes. If the depot's 
starting hex is currently controlled by the enemy then the depot may not be 
used during the current turn.
During the Depot Movement Phase depot units must be moved sequentially. 
A depot must complete its move before the next higher numbered depot can 
start its move. Depot units may enter friendly rail, friendly city, clear and 
enemy rail hexes only. Depot units may never enter enemy zones of control 
(see 6.10). A depot pays no penalty for entering friendly rail and city 
hexes. For each clear or enemy rail hex a depot enters it will lose some of 
its ability to remove fatigue from friendly units.
When a depot ends its move it will distribute supplies to every 
friendly unit within two hexes of the depot's ending location. All friendly 
units that were eligible to receive supplies will be considered IN-SUPPLY for 
the remainder of the turn. Friendly combat groups that receive supplies may 
have fatigue reduced in each of its component units. The amount of fatigue 
removed from each unit varies with the number of penalty hexes (clear, enemy 
rail) the depot entered during depot movement:
PENALTY HEXESFATIGUE REMOVED
050%
133%
225%
320%
417%
514%
612%
During depot movement a depot may enter a maximum of 4 penalty hexes. 
For fatigue removal purposes 2 is added to the number "penalty hexes" for 
Axis depots during RAIN or VERY COLD (in 1941) weather. For fatigue removal 
purposes 1 is subtracted from the number of "penalty hexes" for each 1000 
vehicles a player has in his pool.
If you move a depot incorrectly and you wish to start over, press the 
(A) key to abort.
MOT, PZG, PZ, MECH and TANK type units that have fatigue reduced will 
consume 2 supply points. Other units that have fatigue reduced will consume 1 
supply point. If the supply pool reaches zero then there will be no fatigue 
reduction for the remainder of the turn. A players supply pool will not be 
displayed, but supply points produced during the production phase maybe 
accumulated up to a maximum of 255 supply points. An "*" will be displayed 
during supply distribution for each supply point consumed.
Combat groups may only receive supplies (remove fatigue) once per turn. 
The players have the option of using the Auto-Move function at the start of 
each depot's move. Using auto-move a depot will automatically retrace its 
previous move until it enters a hex that is not a friendly rail or friendly 
city.
After each depot has been used to distribute supplies it will be 
removed from the map until the start of next turn's depot movement phase.
5.3  Building Rail Hexes:
During the depot movement phase depots may be used to build friendly 
rail hexes. Move the depot to the desired hex and press (B) to build. If the 
necessary conditions are met then a rail hex will be built in the designated 
hex at the start of the next turn.
Rail hexes may only be built in clear or enemy rail hexes. Rail hexes 
will not be built on the following turn if the weather is RAIN for that turn.
The Axis player must alternate his rail construction between the area 
north of hexrow 21 (inclusive) and the area south of hexrow 21 (exclusive). 
On the first turn the Axis player may only designate a hex in the southern 
area for rail construction; on the second turn he may only designate a hex in 
the northern area, etc.
Depots that are used to designate rail construction will be returned to 
their starting hex and may be moved again to distribute supplies.
A maximum of one rail hex may be built by each player at the start of 
each turn. If you designate more than one hex for rail construction then only 
the last hex designated will be used. During the depot movement phase the 
message (B)UILD RAIL will be displayed in inverse to remind that a rail 
construction hex has not been designated for the current turn.
5.4  Supply Scan:
The (S)UPPLY SCAN function may be used during depot movement to show 
which friendly groups have NOT received supplies. The supply scan erases all 
friendly SUPPLIED groups from the display.
8.0  MOVEMENT - TACTICAL PLOT PHASE
During the Movement - Tactical Plot Phase friendly units may receive 
replacement; combat groups may build up artillery, entrench, plot tactical 
movement, or conduct strategic movement; air groups may move or plot air 
strikes.
8.1  Group Selection:
To perform any of the actions listed above you must first select the 
desired group. The computer will display the map; move the cursor on top of 
the group or stack you wish to select and press (G) to get the group. If you 
(G)et a stack and the computer selects the wrong group then press (Q) and the 
computer will select the other group in the stack. When you have concluded 
your actions with a group you may press (Q) and move the cursor to a 
different group or press (N) and the computer will automatically select the 
next higher numbered friendly group.
After you have selected a unit the computer will list the following 
menu options: MOVE 1 - 6 for strategic movement, (E)XAMiNE to check the 
contents of the group. (R)EPLACE to add replacements or artillery, TAC (P)LOT 
to plot tactical movement. (X)RAIL MOVE to use rail movement. (N)EXT UNIT to 
select the next sequential group. (A)BORT to start over after a botched move, 
and (T)ERRAIN to erase all groups from the map and view terrain.
Also shown on the display are the CURRENT PLOT (which applies only if 
you have plotted tactical movement) and group STATUS. Listed below are the 
status codes and their descriptions:
U  Unsupplied, group may move or entrench up to level 3
S  Supplied. group may move, entrench, add replacements or artillery
M  Moved. group eligible to continue strategic movement
N  No actions allowed
6.2  Strategic Movement:
Strategic movement may be performed by air and combat groups. Combat 
groups that use strategic movement may not plot a tactical move, build up 
artillery, or entrench on the same turn. A group may not receive replacements 
after it has used strategic movement. Air groups that use strategic movement 
may not fly combat missions in the same turn. Groups that use strategic 
movement will return all of their artillery to the artillery pool (see 8.11) 
and lose their entrenchments.
The number of hexes that maybe moved by the various group types is as 
follows:
Mechanized4
Infantry2
Air1
To move a selected group, enter a number 1 - 6 (1 = north, 2 = 
northeast. 3 = southeast, 4 = south, 5 = southwest. 6 = northwest). A group 
may continue moving until it has used its movement allowance, enters a swamp 
or mountain hex or enters an enemy zone of control (ZOC). The computer will 
automatically abort a group's move if any of it's component units exceed 94% 
fatigue.
Air groups may only enter clear, friendly rail, friendly city and enemy 
rail hexes during strategic movement. Air groups may not enter an enemy ZOC 
unless a friendly entrenched combat group is in the hex. Combat groups that 
are OUT OF SUPPLY may move a maximum of 1 hex during strategic movement. 
Groups that begin their move on friendly rail or city hexes are considered IN 
SUPPLY for strategic movement purposes.
6.3  Rail Movement:
Rail movement is a form of strategic movement. To use rail movement a 
selected group must begin its move on a friendly rail or city hex. During 
rail movement a group may only enter friendly rail and city hexes. Groups may 
never enter enemy ZOCs when using rail movement. Within the above listed 
restrictions there is no limit to the distance a group may travel using rail 
movement. A maximum of 3 groups per turn may use rail movement (excluding 
depots moved during the Depot Movement Phase).
6.4  Replacements:
Friendly combat groups that are in supply may receive replacements (in 
multiples of 10) to enhance/rebuild the strength of their component units. 
Groups must receive replacements BEFORE adding artillery or using strategic 
movement. Groups may receive replacements after they plot tactical movement.
The cost for adding replacement points is the same as the cost for 
building new combat points (see 4.9). A unit's experience will be reduced 
when replacements are added (see 8.2).
6.5  Artillery Build-ups:
Friendly combat groups that are in supply may build up their artillery 
strength. Use the (R)EPLACEMENT routine for the selected group and press (6) 
to add artillery. Thirty artillery points will be added to the selected group 
(if the artillery pool contains less than 30 points then the remainder of the 
pool will he added). A group may add artillery only once per turn. After 
adding artillery a group may not move or add replacements for the remainder 
of the turn.
6.6  Tactical Movement Plot:
Tactical movement is plotted during the Movement-Tactical Plot Phase 
and executed during the Tactical Execution-Combat Phase. Mechanized groups 
may move 2 hexes and infantry groups 1 hex per turn using tactical movement. 
A tactical plot is a simple instruction 1 - 3 characters in length that 
defines a group's movement during the execution phase. Numerical characters 1 
- 6 are used to plot movement in a particular compass direction (see 6.2). 
The letter "S" at the end of a plot instructs the group to attack in the 
plotted direction but NOT to move. If an "S" is included in the middle of a 
movement plot then the remainder of the plot will be ignored (a "5S6" plot 
would be interpreted as a "5S"). The letter "B" at the end of a movement plot 
instructs the group NOT to move or attack but only to fire an artillery 
bombardment. A "2B" plot would instruct the group to bombard the adjacent hex 
northeast of the firing group. A "O" plot instructs the group to do nothing 
(pause) for one tactical movement segment.
Mechanized groups may move twice (one hex per segment, see 7.0) during 
tactical execution; infantry groups may move once. Non-combat groups may not 
move during tactical execution.
Examples of legal mechanized group plots areas follows: (A)1 (B)2S 
(C)34 (D)56S (E)2B.
Examples of legal infantry group plots are as follows: (G)4 (H)5S (I)1B.
Combat will occur during tactical execution whenever a group attempts 
to move into a hex occupied by an enemy group. For a group to attack an enemy 
group in an adjacent hex to the northeast, movement plot (B) shown above 
could be used. If the defending unit is forced to retreat during combat. the 
"S" at the end of the plot would instruct the attacking group NOT to advance 
into the vacated hex. In example (D) shown above, the "S" at the end of the 
plot applies only to combat that occurs during the second tactical move. 
Enemy ZOCs have no effect on tactical movement.
TACTICAL PLOT SUMMARY
1 - 6 (d)irection
S(S)top
B(B)ombardment
0(p)ause
LEGAL INFANTRY GROUP PLOTS:
d, dS, dB
LEGAL MECHANIZED GROUP PLOTS:
d, dS, dB, dd, ddS, ddB, pd, pdS
6.7  Stacking:
A maximum of two friendly groups may be stacked in a single hex. In 
strategic or tactical movement a group may never enter a hex occupied by two 
friendly groups (of any type). During depot or rail movement groups may pass 
through a hex that contains two other friendly units but may not stop in an 
overstacked hex. Groups may not retreat into an overstacked hex after combat.
6.8  Entrenchment:
After all moves have been completed the computer will attempt to 
entrench all of your eligible units. Groups that used strategic or rail 
movement or plotted tactical movement are not eligible to entrench.
There are six levels of entrenchment (0 - 5). Each eligible unit has a 
50% chance of achieving its next higher level of entrenchment.
Groups in level 3 or 4 entrenchments may not achieve a higher level if 
OUT OF SUPPLY. Groups with entrenchment levels 0 - 2 may achieve a higher 
level regardless of their supply state.          
6.9  Plotting Air strikes:
Air strikes are plotted during the Movement-Tactical Plot Phase and 
resolved during the Tactical Execution-Combat Phase. Air groups that are 
IN-SUPPLY and did not move during the turn are eligible to plot air strikes.
For each eligible friendly air group the computer will display the map 
with the cursor on the group's location. By pressing the direction keys 1-6 
you may "fly" the cursor to a target hex and then press (B) to bomb an enemy 
city (to destroy factories) or (G) to ground attack enemy group(s) in the 
hex. For air strike purposes, Axis air groups have a maximum range of 4 
hexes; Soviet air groups have a maximum range of 3 hexes.
When "flying" the cursor to the target hex use the most direct route 
possible. If you make a mistake in moving the cursor then use the (A)BORT key 
and start over. If you do not want an air group to plot an air strike then 
press (Q) and the program will move to the next eligible air group.
5.10  Zones of Control:
All groups on the map have a zone of control (ZOC). Each group projects 
a ZOC into the 6 adjacent hexes. ZOCs have no effect on tactical movement. 
during strategic movement combat groups must stop when entering an enemy ZOC. 
Combat groups may retreat into an enemy ZOC only if the retreat hex is 
occupied by a friendly entrenched group. Depots may never enter an enemy ZOC. 
Groups may never enter an enemy ZOC using rail movement. Groups may move 
directly from one enemy controlled hex to another enemy controlled hex only 
if the destination hex is occupied by a friendly ENTRENCHED group. Airfields 
may only enter an enemy ZOC if the hex contains a friendly entrenched group.
7.0  TACTICAL EXECUTION - COMBAT PHASE
During the Tactical Execution - Combat Phase the moves/attacks 
previously plotted will be executed using the following sequence:
(1)  Air strike Resolution
 (2)  First Player Determination
(3)  First Player Movement
(4)  First Player Attack Resolution
(5)  Second Player Movement
 (6)  Second Player Attack Resolution
(7)  First Player Mechanized Movement
(8)  First Player Attack Resolution
(9)  Second Player Mechanized Movement
    (10)  Second Player Attack Resolution
7.1  Air strike Resolution:
Air strike will be resolved using the following sequence:
(1) Air to Air Combat Resolution
(2) Bombing/Ground Attack Resolution
In air to air combat each supplied enemy air group within 2 hexes of 
the target hex will intercept the bombing group (air units that moved may not 
intercept during the same turn). Bombing groups with a fighter escort will 
suffer fewer losses in air to air combat and inflict higher losses on the 
intercepting (defending) fighters. Air strikes with a range of 2 or less from 
their home base will automatically have a fighter escort. Intercepting air 
groups that had also plotted an ESCORTED air strike on the same turn will 
intercept at only 1/2 of their aircraft strength. Axis air groups will be 
TWICE as effective as Soviet air groups in air to air combat.
Following air to air combat the bombing air group will suffer 1 to 3% . 
"flak" losses prior to attacking the target. If the target is an enemy city 
then the bombers will attempt to destroy factories. It will require 50 
aircraft points to have a 50% chance of destroying 1 enemy factory. The 
MAXIMUM number of factories that may be destroyed is equal to BOMBiNG 
AIRCRAFT POINTS / 50, fractions rounded up. If the target is an enemy air 
group then the target air group will suffer approximately 1 aircraft point 
loss for every 10 bombing aircraft points. If the target is an enemy combat 
group then approximately 1 fatigue point will be added and 1% strength point 
losses will be suffered by each of the target group's component units for 
every 5 attacking aircraft points. Soviet bombers will be one-half as 
effective as Axis bombers (the examples given above are for German bombers).
In poor weather there is a chance that overcast will obscure the target 
and prevent the attack. The chance of overcast for each type of weather is: 
CLEAR-0%. COLD-20%, VERY COLD-40%, RAIN-60%. Poor weather will also reduce 
the effectiveness of air attacks as follows: COLD-50%. VERY COLD-67%, 
RAIN-75%.
7.2  First Player Determination:
Prior to executing the tactical movement plots the computer will 
determine which player will be the first player for the current turn. In the 
early years of the war (41-42) during clear weather the Axis player will be 
the First Player 90 - 95% of the time. During the later years of the war 
(43-44) or during periods of COLD, VERY COLD or RAIN the Soviet's chance of 
becoming the First Player will increase.
7.3  Tactical Movement:
All combat groups that plotted tactical movement will execute their 
moves in the sequence shown in 7.0. If the Axis is the first player then Axis 
infantry groups would move during segment (3). An Axis mechanized group that 
plotted tactical move "23" would move in direction 2 during segment (3) and 
move in direction 3 during segment (7).
During tactical movement the computer will move combat groups 
sequentially. in group number order. Combat groups that are unable to execute 
their moves due to overstack or illegal terrain will have the remainder of 
their plot canceled.
7.4  Combat:
Combat groups that attempt to move into an enemy occupied hex during 
tactical movement will not move but will attack the enemy group(s) in that 
hex during the Attack Resolution Segment. If more than one friendly group 
attempts to enter the same enemy occupied hex during the same movement 
segment then those groups will combine their combat strengths in an attack. 
Attacks are resolved sequentially, in ATTACKER group number order.
7.5  Bombardments:
Prior to assaulting an enemy occupied hex, the attacking groups will 
combine their artillery strengths and bombard the enemy group(s) in the 
target hex. In addition to the artillery points in the attacking groups, each 
unit within the attacking groups will add its INTRINSIC ARTILLERY strength to 
the bombardment. A unit s intrinsic artillery is equal to 1/10 of its 
ADJUSTED combat strength.
The effects of artillery bombardments are identical to the effects of 
ground support air strikes. Each artillery point is equivalent to 1/3 of a 
German aircraft point.
7.6  Combat Odds:
The result of each attack is dependent on the combat odds calculated by 
the computer. Combat odds are determined by comparing the Adjusted Combat 
Strength (ACS) of the attacker to the ACS of the defender. The basic ACS of a 
combat unit is calculated as follows:
STRENGTH x EXPERIENCE x (100 - FATIGUE) / 10000.
The ACS may be further modified by the effects of terrain (see 8.3), 
weather (see 8.4) and entrenchments (see 7.9).
Mechanized groups have their combat strengths multiplied by 1.5 when 
attacking units defending in clear (or rail) terrain. Soviet mechanized 
groups will not receive this bonus until October 1942. 
The presence of enemy mechanized groups in the defender's hex will 
reduce the multiple for the attacker's mechanized group(s). The percentage of 
reduction is equal to the defender mechanized group strength divided by the 
total defense strength.
Mechanized groups will not have their strengths enhanced when attacking 
during RAIN weather. Axis Mechanized groups will not have their combat 
strengths enhanced when attacking in VERY COLD weather before 1943.
7.7  Defender Retreats
Listed below are the defender retreat chances at the various combat 
odds:
   RETREAT
1-1 or less 0%
1.5-125%
2-150%
2.5-175%
3-1 or more   100%
Defender groups may not retreat into a hex containing 2 friendly 
groups. Defender groups may not retreat into an enemy ZOC unless an 
entrenched friendly group occupies the hex. Defender groups will surrender if 
a legal retreat hex is not available. The direction of retreat will be 
determined by the computer.
Air groups forced to retreat after combat will be destroyed instead. 
Destroyed air groups will return 50% of their aircraft to the reinforcement 
pool. Destroyed air groups will be returned to play on a friendly depot entry 
hex one or two turns following their destruction (with zero aircraft).
Groups defending in a fortified city will NEVER retreat. Defending 
groups that have surviving entrenchments AFTER the attack will NEVER retreat. 
The percentage of defender entrenchments destroyed is as follows.
ODDS  DESTROYED
2-1 or less20%
4-140%
6-160%
8-180%
more than 8-1ALL
Fractional entrenchments are rounded DOWN.
7.8  Attacker Advances:
In combat situations where the defender is forced to retreat the 
attacking group(s) may advance into the vacated hex. Each attacking 
mechanized group has a 90% chance of advancing into a vacated hex. Each 
infantry group has only a 30% chance of advancing. Attacker groups that 
plotted an "S" at the end of their tactical move will never advance after 
combat. Attacker groups that fail to advance after combat will cancel the 
remainder of their tactical plot.
7.9  Entrenchment Effects:
Entrenchments reduce the enemy air strikes and bombardments. Each 
entrenchment level provides a multiple to a defender's ACS (i.e. a defender 
with entrenchment 5 will have his ACS doubled). The effects of each level of 
entrenchment are as follows:
   DEFENSE
   LEVELBOMBARDMENT  MULTIPLE
0    100%1.0
190%1.2
280%1.4
370%1.6
460%1.8
550%2.0
7.10  Combat Casualties:
Listed below are the AVERAGE casualty percentages that will occur at 
various combat odds:
ODDS   ATTACKER   DEFENDER
1-550% 4%
1-220% 1%
1-110% 2%
2-1 5% 4%
5-1 2%10%
     10-1 1%20%
20-1.5%40%
The strength point losses indicated above would be in addition to the 
losses caused by prior air strikes or bombardments. The attacker casualties 
will increase by 10% for each level of entrenchment of the defending group. 
Thus a 2-1 attack against a defender with level 5 entrenchments would cause 
7.5% casualties on the attacking force. Attacker losses will never exceed 
50%.
In combat situations where the defender ACS is less than or equal to 
ONE, the attacker casualties will be .01% (the defensive fire from airfields 
or shattered combat groups would be negligible).
8.0  GENERAL OPERATIONS
8.1  Fatigue:
Combat units gain fatigue whenever they are moved or are involved in 
combat. A fraction of a unit's fatigue will be removed each turn that the 
unit is placed in supply. The amount of fatigue gained through movement 
(including retreats and advances) varies with the type of terrain entered and 
the type of weather. The normal fatigue points gained for entering each type 
of terrain are listed below (SM = strategic movement, TM = tactical 
movement):
TERRAIN SM-FATIGUE TM-FATIGUE
clear 510
city 510
forest 510
rail 510
swamp2550
mountain2550
seaimpassableimpassable
Mechanized groups using tactical movement to enter clear, city or rail 
terrain during clear or cold weather will suffer only half of the normal 
fatigue.
Groups using strategic movement across a river while leaving an enemy 
ZOC will gain an additional 20 fatigue points. Groups using tactical movement 
across a river will gain 10 additional fatigue points (ZOCs have no effect). 
Units never gain fatigue when using Rail Movement. The normal fatigue costs 
may be multiplied during adverse weather conditions as follows:
CLEARx 1
COLDx 2
VERY COLDx 3
RAINx 4
VERY COLDx 5
(Axis 1941)
Whenever combat occurs, all of the units involved will suffer 8-12 
fatigue points. During cold, very cold or rain weather the attacker fatigue 
penalty will be DOUBLED. Units forced to retreat will suffer 10-80 additional 
fatigue points, varying with the weather and the experience of the retreating 
units.
Fatigue will never exceed 95%. Units with 95% fatigue will suffer 25% 
strength loss each time additional fatigue is added. A combat group that 
contains one or more units with 95% fatigue may NOT move. At the end of each 
turn units will have their fatigue reduced by 1%. Units whose fatigue exceeds 
94% due to tactical movement or retreating will not have their fatigue 
reduced on the SAME turn.
8.2  Experience:
A unit's experience reflects its effectiveness as a combat force. A 
unit's experience will increase each time it participates in combat. A unit's 
experience will decrease each time that unit receives replacements. Soviet 
MECH units, Axis elite SS units and all German units during 1941 -42 will 
suffer less experience reduction than other units when adding replacements.
At the end of each turn all units with an experience less than 50 will 
have their experience increased by 5 points (when playing levels 3 or 4, the 
Soviet RIFLE and CAV units have a 75% chance of gaining experience, the 
Soviet TANK and MECH units have a 56% chance of gaining experience).
8.3  Terrain Effects on Combat:
In calculating combat odds the attacker combat strength may be reduced 
by the type of terrain in the defenders hex. Listed below are the effects of 
each type of terrain on the attacker strength:
DEFENDER TERRAIN  ATTACKER
clearx 1
 railx 1
 cityx 1
 fortified cityx 1/2
forestx 1
swampx 1/2
  mountainx 1/3
across river hexsidex 1/2
In addition to the above listed effects an attacker group's strength is 
halved when attacking out of a swamp or a fortified city. Terrain effects on 
combat are cumulative; a group attacking out of a swamp, across a river, and 
into a mountain hex would have its strength divided by 12 (1/2 x 1/2 x 1/3).
8.4  Weather:
The weather is adjusted at the end of each turn. Listed below are the 
weather probabilities for each month of the year
JANCOLD 75%VERY COLD 20%RAIN 5%
FEBCOLD 75%VERY COLD 20%RAIN 5%
MARCOLD 47%VERY COLD 10%RAIN 43%
APRCOLD 20% RAIN 80%
MAYCLEAR 30%RAIN 70%
JUNCLEAR 72%RAIN 28%
JULCLEAR 100%
AUG  CLEAR 100%
SEPCLEAR 100%
OCTCOLD 20%RAIN 80%
NOVCOLD 75%VERY COLD 20%RAIN 5%
DECCOLD 75%VERY COLD 20%RAIN 5%
From 1 December 1941 to 28 February 1942 the chance for VERY COLD 
weather will be 80%.
Certain types of weather will affect the player's ability to attack or 
supply their forces. During periods of RAIN all units will have their attack 
strength halved and Axis supply will be reduced (see 5.2). RAIN reduces all 
strategic and tactical movement rates to ONE HEX per turn. In 1941 VERY COLD 
weather will cause Axis supply to be reduced (see 5.2). During 1941 and 42, 
VERY COLD weather will cause Soviet attacks to be DOUBLED and Axis attacks 
will be QUARTERED.
During COLD or VERY COLD weather all rivers and swamps will be frozen. 
Frozen rivers will have no effect on movement or combat. Frozen swamps will 
be treated as forest hexes.
8.5  Production:
At the end of each turn each player will receive infantry, vehicle, 
artillery, aircraft, supply and new factory points based upon the number of 
the various types of factories controlled by the players. The list below 
shows the number of factories to build each type of item:
5 vehicle factories = 10 vehicle points
  (2550 maximum in pool)
   10 artillery factories = 10 artillery points
  (2550 maximum in pool)
   20 aircraft factories = 1 aircraft point
  (255 maximum in reinforcement pool)
    1 supply center = 1 supply point
  (255 maximum in pool)
    10 population points = 10 infantry points
  (2550 maximum in pool)
       10 heavy industry = 1 construction point
  (255 maximum in pool)
   5 construction points = 1 new factory
  (255 maximum in city for each type of factory)    
Building factories is a two-step process. First heavy industry will 
build construction points. Construction points will be accumulated by the 
computer but will not be displayed to the players. Next construction points 
will be converted to new factories in the factory pool (see 4.8). The maximum 
number of new factories that will be built in one turn is equal to 
CONSTRUCTION POINTS / 20, fractions rounded down. Dismantled factories will 
be converted back into construction points (1 dismantled factory converts to 
5 construction points).
In 1943 there is a 30% chance that the Axis player will receive no 
production. In 1944 there is a 50% chance that the Axis player will receive 
no production.
Soviet infantry reinforcements will vary according to the month and 
year. Listed below are the modifiers for the Soviet infantry reinforcement 
points:
JUN 1941-JUL 1941x 3.33
AUG 1941-DEC 1942x 0.83
1943-1944x 0.67
8.6  Lend Lease:
Starting in October 1941 the Soviet player will receive "lend lease" 
shipments. Lend lease shipments maybe received in NORTH, SOUTH or EAST 
Russia. Lend lease shipments will consist of vehicle and aircraft points. 
Lend lease shipments will start out small but will increase each year. Lend 
lease shipments that arrive from the NORTH will be twice as large as those 
received from the other areas.
The computer will randomly select the area of arrival for each lend 
lease shipment. Listed below are the chances of arrival for each area:
NORTH 50%   SOUTH 25%   EAST 25%
Shipments scheduled to arrive in the NORTH will be canceled if both 
Murmansk and Archangel are Axis controlled. Shipments scheduled to arrive in 
the NORTH during the months OCTOBER thru APRIL will be canceled if Murmansk 
is Axis controlled. Shipments scheduled to arrive in the SOUTH will be 
cancelled if Baku is Axis controlled.
Shipments that arrive from the NORTH will be subject to reduction 
bombing. Supplied Axis air groups within 2 hexes of the NORTH edge of the map 
will attack lend lease convoys that arrive in that area. Each aircraft point 
in the bombing air group has a 10% chance of "hitting" the convoy. Each hit 
will destroy 1 lend lease aircraft point or 10 lend lease vehicle points. 
There is a 50% chance that the Axis aircraft will fail to attack the convoy 
due to poor weather.
Shipments that arrive between OCTOBER and APRIL (winter) may not be 
used by the Soviet player unless Murmansk is connected to Archangel by an 
unbroken (must be free of Axis units or zones of control) rail line. This 
rail line must pass through the hex southwest of Archangel. If this rail line 
is broken then the winter shipments will accumulate at Murmansk until the 
rail is rebuilt or until the end of winter (May). If Archangel is taken by 
the Axis player, all lend lease shipments will accumulate in Murmansk until 
Archangel is recaptured by the Soviet player.
8.7  Partisans:
Starting in 1942 Axis rail lines will be subject to partisan attacks. 
With each passing year the frequency of partisan attacks will increase. 
Partisan attacks will only destroy Axis rail hexes built in Russia. Partisan 
attacks will never occur in an Axis unit's ZOC. The Axis player may reduce 
the frequency of partisan attacks by 20% for every 150 points maintained in 
the infantry Pool (acting as security forces).
8.8  Capturing Cities:
Friendly groups may never use strategic movement to enter an enemy 
controlled city. Friendly groups that tactical move or advance after combat 
into an enemy controlled city will capture the city. Captured cities will 
have their population reduced to zero and all factories except the supply 
centers will be destroyed. Each time a city is captured/recaptured its supply 
centers will be halved.
8.9  Automatic Ending:
The game will end automatically if the Soviet player controls Riga, 
Brest, and either Konigsberg or Bucharest. The game will end automatically if 
the Axis player controls Moscow, Gorki, and Kuybyshev, and the Axis Player 
will be awarded a decisive victory.
8.10  Artillery:
Artillery may be added to combat groups at a rate of 30 points per 
turn. Groups with more than 210 artillery points may not add artillery. All 
artillery points are automatically returned to the artillery pool whenever a 
group moves or advances after combat. A group permanently consumes 25% of its 
artillery points each time it fires a bombardment. Artillery points may be 
destroyed when a group is bombarded or ground attacked by the enemy. If a 
group is forced to retreat after combat then all of its artillery points are 
destroyed.
8.11  Soviet Reserves:
In June and July of 1941 the Soviets will receive 4 times their normal 
infantry reinforcement points. This represents the activation of the Soviet 
reserves in the early weeks of the war.
8.12  Soviet Guards:
At the end of any turn in which a Soviet unit has both a strength 
greater than 40 and experience greater than 80 then that unit will be 
renumbered and designated as a guards unit. Guards units are allowed a higher 
maximum strength than normal units of the same type.
8.13  Axis Unit Designations:
In January 1943 all Axis MOT units will be changed to PZG units and 
have their maximum strength increased from 100 to 130. SS MOT units will be 
changed to SS PZG and the elite SS units will have their maximum strength 
increased to 200. In October 1943 the elite SS PZG units will be changed to 
SS PZ units.
8.14  Soviet Siberian Reinforcements:
When playing at solitaire levels 1 or 2, the Soviet player will receive 
Siberian reinforcement units. The Soviet player will receive one combat group 
(containing 5 full strength corps with experience levels of 70) per turn. The 
Siberian reinforcements will always arrive in Kuybyshev. The reinforcements 
will not arrive if (1) Kuybyshev is Axis controlled, (2) Kuybyshev already 
contains two Soviet groups, (3) the maximum number of combat groups or units 
are already in play.
When playing solitaire level 2 the Siberian reinforcements will arrive 
from June through December 1942. When playing solitaire level 1 the Siberian 
reinforcements will arrive from June 1942 through the end of the war.
9.0  VICTORY CONDITIONS
At the end of the game victory points will be calculated and the level 
of victory will be determined by comparing the scores of the two players.
9.1  Victory Points:
Each player will score 1 victory point for each friendly population 
point or supply center (points are not received for the Urals or Germany) and 
20 points for each controlled city. The Axis player scores 50 points for each 
month he survives starting January 1943. Victory points are DOUBLED when 
playing the short scenarios.
Handicap points are awarded in the various scenarios to provide play 
balance:
Barbarossa (short)Axis+ 300
Case Blue (short)Soviet+ 150
All long scenariosSoviet+ 150
9.2  Victory Levels:
Subtract the Axis Victory Points from the Soviet Victory Points and 
compare the results to the following table to determine the victory level:
1000 and upSoviet Decisive Victory
500 to 999Soviet Substantive Victory
100 to 499 Soviet Marginal Victory
-99 to 99Draw
-499 to -100Axis Marginal Victory
999 to -500Axis Substantive Victory
-1000 or lessAxis Decisive Victory
10.0  SOLITAIRE PLAY
When playing solitaire games the computer will command the Soviet 
forces. There are 4 levels of solitaire difficulty. The level of difficulty 
is determined when starting a new game and may be altered when restarting a 
saved game. As the level number is decreased the Soviet forces will receive 
more reinforcements and will be allowed to gain experience and entrench 
FASTER, Also, as the level number is decreased the Soviet forces will attack 
more effectively during VERY COLD weather before 1943. When playing solitaire 
levels 1 and 2, the Soviet player will receive the Siberian reinforcements 
(see 8.14). When playing at solitaire levels l or 2, the German units may 
move a maximum of TWO turns while "out of supply" and then may move no 
further until placed "in supply" (the computer will not inform you of this, 
it will just keep your unit from moving). These levels maybe used to handicap 
a two player game if desired. Level 3 is considered the "historical" level.
It is possible to start a game in solitaire mode, save it, and then 
restart it as a two-player game. To do this set the main menu to two-player 
mode before reloading the saved game data.
It is possible to save a two player game and restart it as a solitaire 
game. This should only be done experimentally as the computer maybe confused 
by many human devised deployments.
