
Crypt of Medea


Most of the walkthrough is from the GameFAQs site at
http://www.gamefaqs.com/ .  Based upon play using the
deprotected copy, one or two corrections have been made
and some notes have been added.

Since winning is not possible using the old deprotected
copy of the game, some changes have been made to produce a
version that works better. In a test, the game was won
playing the new deprotected version*.

Rubywand
May, 2001


*The new version of the deprotected copy should be available
from Tarnover, Asimov, and other Apple II archive sites.
Look for a file named "CryptOfMedea_v2001.zip" or something
similar.

The new version can be identified after booting by the
presence of a version number in the Text displayed in the
first room's description-- e.g. "v2001.5".

For links to archives, see the Apple II FAQs Game Sites page
at http://home.swbell.net/rubywand/A2FAQs7GAMESITES.html .



CRYPT OF MEDEA WALKTHROUGH

Written by Douglas Cameron 12/1/90

This is a step by step solution to CRYPT OF MEDEA by
SIR-TECH, an old Apple adventure but well done.  I hope that
it will take you through the game to a successful
conclusion.  Words with capital letters can be abbreviated
by the capital letters.  The parser looks for four letter
words which can save some typing. Save the game often
because a wrong step will kill you.  For example, you will
die when you swing on the rope if you are carrying too much.
Going East from the lab with the table without the rod will
also kill you.  Also there are things you can do which I
don't mention in the solution which will get you killed.
They are fun to try but not without a save game.  When you
go down through the trap door, you must have the flask,
candle, matches, shovel, and gloves.

Get candle, look crypt, look tombstone, pull stone, get
matches, light candle, move case, Down, North, burn hand
with candle, get shovel, South, Up, dig, pull knob, East,
get knife, East, get flask, South, look head, get id, search
corpse, get vial, drop shovel, drop matches, drop vial,
South, get player, East, open vial, throw vial at web, East,
get tape, West, North, North, put tape in player, play tape,
drop player, put id in slot, get diamond, West, West, cut
glass case with diamond, drop diamond, get mask, get glass,
East, East, South, push button, drop candle, wear mask,
West, push violet button, East, get rod, push yellow button,
push orange button, West, push blue button, East, drop mask,
drop knife (you must keep the candle and the glass), North,
North, cut rope with glass, get rope.

~~Note: Do _NOT_ press one of the buttons in this room.
Pressing the black or white button shocks the human in the
tank to consciousness and makes it impossible to win the
game. (If you press one of the buttons, you might as well
press it again to see what happens and remove all doubt.)

South, East, East, throw rope, swing (if you are carrying
too much you die).

~~Note: The old deprotected version will not let you swing
across even if you are not carrying too much-- the disk 
reboots. Be sure you are playing the new version*.

East, throw glass at mutant, North, get magnet, South, West,
swing, West, West, North, use magnet, drop magnet, get key,
South, East, East, swing, East, unlock door, South, West,
get gloves, wear gloves, East, North, West, swing, West,
West, South, South, get dog, North, North, East, East,
swing, East, South, South, East, North, throw dog at scum,
look moss, turn valve, South, WEST, North, look vat, Down,
East, get needle, West, Up, North, West, swing, West, West,
South, DROP GLOVES, get matches, shovel, flask, knife, South,
East, East, inject mass, drop needle, (go back and get gloves,
wear them, return to trapdoor).

~~Note: The business about dropping your gloves and retrieving
them after using the needle is new. The game would not allow
picking up everything listed. (Don't think I was carrying
anything extra ... . It won't hurt to see if you can get all
of the items without dropping the gloves.)

PULL TRAPDOOR. Down, East, East, dig, drop shovel, get torch,
light torch, West, pull switch.

~~Note: Pulling the switch opens a door. You then have three
moves to get into the room with the fuse. If you waste a move
the door to the room will slam shut in front of you. Since it
looks like the door can not be reopened from outside, you will
need to RESTORE a saved game and try again.

West, West, West, DROP CANDLE, get fuse. Push button (make
sure you are wearing the gloves before doing this), East,
East, East, South, West, cut lard with knife, get slice,
put slice in flask, East, North, West, get burner, light
burner, melt slice with burner, drop burner, West, get
timbers, East, East, South, West, oil dial, drop flask.

West, West, Up, West, South, make bridge with timbers, South,
East, East, get earplugs (there is a mole here which you can
get but it doesn't appear to have any use), wear earplugs,
West, West, North, North East, Down, East, East, East, North,
East, Down, East, North, get barrel (don't read the sign),
South, West, Up, West, South, West, West, West, Up, West,
West, make bomb (you must have the barrel and the fuse),
get axe, North.

At this point, save the game and turn the sound off with
Control-S.  Timing is crucial.  You must be prepared to
enter the next three commands quickly.  The timing is
crucial and regular Apple II speed necessary - normal speed
on a GS and will work. Light bomb, drop bomb, South.

~~Note: Maybe this works if playing on the original disk. It
definitely does not work when playing on the old deprotected
copy version. You will not be able to light the fuse, drop
the bomb and get out of the room before the bomb explodes.
The new version* of the deprotected copy fixes this
glitch by increasing the delay before the bomb explodes. At
normal Apple II speed, you have about 24 seconds after the
game's warning to drop the bomb and exit the room. So, you
do not need to turn off sound or especially rush. (If you
are playing on an accelerated IIgs, set speed to Normal.)

North, North, use axe, North, Up. You are done - the game
records 70 experience points here. I don't think that there
are any more.

